[s1] VAKANÜVİS- Uluslararası Tarih Araştırmaları Dergisi/ International Journal of Historical 
Researches, Yıl/Vol. 8, Sayı/No. 1, Bahar/Spring 2023  ISSN: 2149-9535 / 2636-7777 
 
Araştırma Makalesi 
How to Lost a War: 
Strategic Command Faults and Defeat in the Ottoman-
Russian War of 1877-1878  
Umut Akçakaya* 
(ORCID: 0000-0002-6285-5982) 
 
Makale Gönderim Tarihi Makale Kabul Tarihi 
13.11.2022 16.01.2023 
 
Atıf Bilgisi/Reference Information 
Chicago: Akçakaya, U., “ How to Lost a War:  Strategic Command Faults and 
Defeat in the Ottoman -Russian War of 1877 -1878”, Vakanüvis-Uluslararası 
Tarih Araştırmaları Dergisi, 8/1 (Mart 2023): 1-33. 
APA: Akçakaya, U. (2023). How to Lost a War:  Strategic Command Faults and 
Defeat in the Ottoman -Russian War of 1877 -1878. Vakanüvis-Uluslararası 
Tarih Araştırmaları Dergisi, 8 (1) , 1-33. 
 
Abstract  
Considering the results of the Ottoman -Russian War of 1877 -1878, it was 
one of the most important wars in the Ottoman history. The war was a tough 
exam for the Ottoman army, but the defeat could not be prevented. The most 
important reason for defeat was the mistakes made in strategic command. 
The Ottoman war plan was prepared on the basis of wrong predictions and 
important mistakes were made in the deployment of the forces. The se 
mistakes allowed the Russian army to easily cross the Danube. Ottoman 
decision makers could not take precautions in time and the Russian army was 
able to seize the Balkan passes quickly. The mistakes in the strategic 
command continued throughout the war. A multi -headed system was created 
                                                           
* PhD., Republic of Türkiye Ministry of National Defence, General Staff, Republic of 
Türkiye, umutakcakaya@outlook.com. 
Dr., T.C. Milli Savunma Bakanlığı, Genel Kurmay Başkanlığı , Türkiye, 
umutakcakaya@outlook.com.  
[s2] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           2 
 
for the command of the war, and it was not possible to establish a unity of 
command. In addition, incompatibility and personal struggles among the 
commanders at the front paralyzed the command system. Under these 
conditions, it was not possible for the Ottoman forces to carry out a 
coordinated oper ation. The only significant success of the Ottoman army on 
the Balkan Front was the defense of Pleven. With the defeat the Ottoman 
rule in the Balkans was largely eliminated. 
Keywords: Ottoman-Russian War of 1877-1878, Balkan Front, Strategic 
Command, Pleven, Shipka. 
 
Bir Savaş Nasıl Kaybedilir: 
1877-1878 Osmanlı-Rus Harbinde Stratejik Komuta Hataları ve Mağlubiyet 
 
Öz 
1877-1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi, Osmanlı tarihinin en önemli savaşlarından 
biri olmuştur. Osmanlı ordusu savaşta iyi bir sınav verememiş ve mağlup 
olmuştur. Mağlubiyetin en önemli sebebi  stratejik komutada yapılan hatalar 
olmuştur. Osmanlı savaş planı yanlış öngörüler üstüne hazırlanmış ve bu plana 
göre kuvvetlerin konuşlanmasında önemli hatalar yapılmıştır. Bu hatalar Rus 
ordusunun kolaylıkla Tuna nehrini geçmesine imkân sağlamıştır. Osmanlı 
karar alıcıları zamanında tedbir alamamış ve Rus ordusu çok kısa süre  
içerisinde Balkan geçitlerini ele geçirebilmiştir. Harbin yönetimi için çok başlı 
bir sistem yaratılmış, emir komuta birliğini tesis etmek mümkün olmamıştır. 
Ayrıca cephedeki komutanlar arasında hüküm süren uyumsuzluk ve kişisel 
mücadeleler emir komuta si stemini felç etmiştir. Bu koşullarda Osmanlı 
kuvvetlerinin koordineli bir harekât yapması mümkün olmamıştır. Osmanlı 
ordusunun Balkan Cephesi’ndeki kayda değer tek başarısı beş ay süren Plevne 
müdafaası olmuştur. Harp sonunda gelen mağlubiyetle Balkanlarda ki Osmanlı 
hâkimiyeti büyük oranda ortadan kalkmıştır. 
Anahtar Kelimeler: 1877-1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi, Balkan Cephesi, 
Stratejik Komuta, Plevne, Şipka. 
 
Introduction 
One of the most difficult exam  given by the Ottoman army in the 
19th century was the Ottoman-Russian War of 1877-1878 (namely the 
93 War).  The main reason for the war was the pan -slavist policies 
[s3] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      3 
 
followed by Russia and the nationalism movement that gained 
strength in the Balkans.  The w ar took place on two fronts, the 
Caucasus and the Balkans.  However, the center of gravity was the 
Balkan Front and the outcome of the war was taken here.  In the 
Caucasus Front, the Ottoman army under the command of Gazi Ahmet 
Muhtar Pasha had a tough fight  against the Russians and gained 
important successes. However, in the last months of the war, defeats 
followed each other and a large area up to Erzurum fell under Russian 
occupation until the armistice. 
Before the war, the Ottoman Empire gathered a large force on the 
Balkan Front.  However, the mistakes made in the war plan and 
deployment did not allow this force to be utilized properly.  Ottoman 
soldiers fought heroically throughout the war and some tactical 
successes were achieved.  Especially the defense o f Pleven had 
repercussions all over the world.  However, mistakes made at the 
strategic command level determined the outcome of the war and the 
Russian advance could only be stopped in front of Istanbul with the 
intervention of England. 
There is an extensive literature on the Ottoman -Russian War of 
1877-1878. The defeat has been a subject studied by some Ottoman 
authors, especially the officers.  In addition, the memories of the 
commanders who were in the decision -making position and the 
defenses of t hose who were tried in the court of war are important 
sources. Besides, the observations of foreign journalists in the region 
during the war contain valuable information.  The memories of foreign 
doctors, who served in the Ottoman army during the war , are o ther 
important sources.  Finally there are extensive studies written by 
European and American researchers right after the war.  In modern 
studies, the defense of Pleven has been emphasized and the reasons 
for the defeat have not been adequately addressed. 
The aim of this study is to evaluate the defeat in the Balkan Front in 
the context of strategic command.  Thus, the history of this important 
war can be carried beyond the heroic stories.  In this context, first of 
all, the political process leading to the w ar will be discussed. Then, the 
strength, operational plans and strategic deployments of both armies 
[s4] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           4 
 
will be examined.  Finally t he strategic command of the war will be 
analyzed in two phases, and faults will be evaluated. 
The Political Process Leading to the War 
The events leading up to the Ottoman -Russian War of 1877 -1878 
started with the conflicts in the Balkans.  The pan -slavist policies 
followed by Russia increased the tension in the region.  The rebellion, 
which started in Herzegovina in July 1875, quickly expanded and 
spread to Bosnia.  While the Ottoman Empire was dealing with this 
problem, a new uprising started in Bulgaria in May 1876. The Bulgarian 
events were reflected in the European public opinion as a Muslim -
Christian conflict and became a n European issue.1 The situation of the 
Ottoman Empire gave Serbia and Montenegro the opportunity they 
were waiting for.  These two principalities  started a war with the 
Ottoman Empire in July.  There were about five thousand Russian 
volunteers in the Serbian army under the command of Russian General 
M.G.Cherniaev.2 
Ottoman forces could not get a decisive victory against the 
Montenegrin army. However, he managed to defeat the Serbian army 
in the Battle of Aleksinac . The Belgrade road was opened to the 
Ottoman army. St.Petersburg which disturbed by this situation,  issued 
an ultimatum on October 31  to stop the war . The Tsar ordered the 
mobilization of six corps in the area near the Romanian border.  The 
Ottoman government, worried about Russia's threat of war, ag reed to 
an armistice with Serbia.  At this stage  London, which wanted to 
prevent Russia from handling the issue alone, took action . With the 
proposal of London, it was decided to discuss the Balkan issues at an 
interstate conference. The Ottoman government, which was reluctant 
to be alone with Russia, accepted this offer reluctantly.3 
                                                           
1 Mahmud Celaleddin Paşa, Mir’at-ı Hakikat, Berekat Yayınevi, İstanbul 1983,  p. 133 -
136.  
2Barbara Jelavich, History Of The Balkans, Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries I , 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995, p. 352-355. 
3 Yuluğ Tekin Kurat, “1877 -1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbinin Sebepleri”, Belleten, 26/104, 
(1962), p. 584 -586; Francis Vinton Greene, Russian Army and its Campaigns in Turkey 
in 1877-1878, D.Appleton&Company, New York 1879, p. 139. 
[s5] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      5 
 
The Istanbul Conference, which gathered to discuss the Balkan 
issues, was opened on 23 December 1876.  The decisions made at the 
end of the conference were quite heavy for Istanbul. The Ottoman 
Empire would make a peace treaty with Serbia and Montenegro that 
included border corrections in favor of these two states.  Bulgaria 
would be divided into two provinces, and extensive concessions would 
be given to Bosnia -Herzegovina an d Bulgaria.  The gover nors of 
Bulgaria and Bosnia -Herzegovina would be appointed by the vote of 
the Great Powers. The governor of Bulgaria would be chosen among 
the Christians. And a commission would be established from the 
representatives of the Great Powers to oversee the reform.4 
On January 18, a general assembly  was convened under the 
chairmanship of Grand Vizier Mithat Pasha to discuss the conference 
proposals and reach a decision.  More than two hundred delegates 
attended this assembly including soldier s, bureaucrats, Muslim and 
non-Muslim clergyman.  According to the prevailing opinion in the 
assembly, the conference proposals greatly restricted the sovereignty 
of the Ottoman Empire.  Moreover It was obvious that such a reform 
would pave the way for indep endence for Bosnia -Herzegovina and 
Bulgaria. As a matter of fact, it was decided to reject the proposals at 
all costs.5 
Upon this decision, the İstanbul C onference ended on January 20  
and the delegates left Istanbul.  The Ottoman Empire signed a peace 
treaty with Serbia on February 28. However, the footsteps of the 
approaching war could be heard.  The states participating in the 
Istanbul Conference came together in London in March and signed a 
protocol. According to the London Protocol, a peace agreement would 
be made with Montenegro, reforms would be implemented in Bosnia -
Herzegovina and Bulgaria, and the mobilization of the Ottoman army 
would be terminated.  If these conditions were to be fulfilled, the 
Russians would also put an end to the mobilization . Istanbul once 
                                                           
4 Enver Ziya Karal, Osmanlı Tarihi VIII, Birinci Meşrutiyet ve İstibdat Devirleri (1876 -
1908), Türk T arih Kurumu, Ankara 2007, p. 31 -32; F.A.K. Yasamee,  Ottoman 
Diplomacy, Abdülhamid II and the Great Powers, 1878-1888, Gorgias Press, New Jersey 
2011, p. 16. 
5 Mahmud Celaleddin Paşa, op. cit., p. 217-219. 
[s6] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           6 
 
again refused the demands. Thereupon, Russia declared war on the 
Ottoman Empire on April 24.6 
Operational Plans, Deployment and Comparison of Forces 
Until a month before the start of the war, the Ottoman army did 
not have an operation plan against Russia. The Ottoman operation 
plan was prepared only at the end of March.  Therefore, there was not 
enough time left to develop the details of the plan and m ake the 
necessary preparations. It was discussed that the Ottoman forces 
would pass to the north of the Danube and meet the Russians there. 
However, for diplomatic reasons, they did not dare to enter Romanian 
territory.7 According to the terms of the Paris  Agreement, both the 
Ottoman Empire and Russia were forbidden to bring soldiers into 
Romania. But the Russians did not take this into account. As of April 
24, Russian troops crossed the border and began to advance towards 
the deployment areas inside Romani a. Thereupon, the Principality of 
Romania formed an alliance with Russia and declared its 
independence on May 21.8 
According to the Ottoman plan, most of the forces were to be 
deployed in Shumen, Varna, Silistra and Ruse. Another part of the 
forces were to be deployed at Vidin, on the western flank of the front. 
A third group of forces were to be deployed between Sofia and Siliven. 
In addition, an important force would be deployed outside the 
operational area against the threat from Serbia, Montenegro and 
Greece.9 According to this concentration, the Danube river was the 
first line and the Balkan mountains were the second line of defense. 
The Commander of the Balkan Front was Müşir Abdülkerim Nadir 
Pasha.10 He was in Shumen with his headquarters. The units un der the 
                                                           
6 Akdes Nimet Kurat, Türkiye ve Rusya, Kültür Bakanlığı Yayınları, Ankara 1990, p. 82. 
7 H.Hikmet Süer,  1877-1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi  Rumeli Cephesi , Genelkurmay 
Basımevi, Ankara 1993,  p. 51-52 
8 Henry Montague Hozier, The Russo-Turkish War I , William Mackenzie, London 1878, 
p. 336. 
9 Süer, op. cit., p. 59. 
10 Abdülkerim Pasha was a former soldier who was over seventy at that time. He spoke 
little and moved slowly. He did not have the ability to make quick decisions, which are 
the basic principles of modern warfare, and to make changes in plans according  to 
[s7] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      7 
 
command of Abdülkerim Pasha were the Danube Eastern Army, the 
Danube Western Army, the Silistra, Ruse, Varna Castle Commands, and 
the Sofia and Sliven Commands. The Eastern Army stationed in 
Shumen was under the command of Müşir Ahmet Eyüp Pasha. T he 
Western Army was stationed in Vidin and was headed by Osman Nuri 
Pasha.11 
The Ottoman mobilization began on 6 November 1876. But the 
gathering and deployment of troops was slow. By the end of June, the 
Ottoman force at the front had reached 186.000  men, including 189 
infantry battalions, 12.000 cavalry and 360 cannons. 12 50 battalions 
were in Shumen under the command of Ahmed Eyüb Pasha, and 50 
battalions were in Vidin under the command of Osman Pasha. There 
were 30 battalions in Ruse, 20 battalions in Sil istra, 12 battalions in 
Varna, 4 battalions in Tırnovo and 6 battalions in Svishtov.  There were 
also 10 battalions in the Balkan passes and Kazanlak. In addition, 
107.000 men (80 battalions) were deployed against Serbia and 
Montenegro in Bosnia -Herzegovina and Shkodra, and 15.000 men (24 
battalions) were deployed in Ioannina against Greece. There were 40 
battalions in Istanbul as a reserve.13 
In addition to these  forces, there was a fleet of 2 armored 
corvettes, 7 armored gunboats, 4 wooden gunboats and 15 
steamboats on the Danube river. The Ottoman Danube Fleet was 
dispersed to regions considered strategically important. Abdulkerim 
Pasha thought that this fleet would play a very important role in the 
defense of the river. But his expectation would not come true. It was a 
big mistake to replace Hüseyin Pasha, who had been in charge of the 
fleet for a long time and knew the river very well, just before the 
battle. Arif Pasha, who was appointed to his place, arrived late and 
                                                                                                                               
developing situations. However, due to his age and seniority, he was respected by his 
unit commanders and his orders were obeyed. Ahmed Saib , Son Osmanlı -Rus 
Muharebesi, Hindiye Matbaası, Cairo 1327 (1911), p. 15. 
11  Süer, op. cit., p. 72-73. 
12 Erkan-ı Harbiye Kolağalarından Reşid, 1293 Osmanlı -Rus Sefer -i Ahiri , Kayıhan 
Yayınları, İstanbul 2016, p. 29; Süer, op. cit., p.  63. 
13 Ahmed Midhat Efendi, Zübdetü’l Hakayık, 93 Harbi’nin Arka Planı , T ürk Tarih 
Kurumu, Ankara 2015, p. 144; Ahmed Saib, op. cit., p. 10-13, 97. 
[s8] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           8 
 
could not take the necessary precautions.14 The Russians restricted the 
movement of the Ottoman fleet and caused serious damage, both 
with artillery fire, mine lines and torpedo attacks.15 
Ottoman troops were deployed very scattered in the Balkans. In 
this conditions it was not possible to concentrate forces at one point 
to create a center of gravity. Due to the large force deployed against 
Serbia, Montenegro and Greece, the Ottoman force at the front was 
weak compared to the Russian army. An important obstacle such as 
the Danube was not suf ficiently utilized, and the points that were 
likely to be crossed by the Russians were not held with sufficient force. 
The main force of the army was conce ntrated in the forts. There were  
not enough forces in the directions of Svishtov -Tırnovo, Svishtov -
Gabrovo and Nikopol-Pleven-Sevlievo, which went from the Danube to 
the Balkan passes. Abdülkerim Pasha thought that the Russians would 
cross the Danube from the region between Ruse and Nikopol. 
However, he believed that he could not prevent the advance of th e 
Russian army with his available forces. Therefore, he concentrated 
most of his forces in fortified positions. He believed that the Russians 
crossing the Danube would not go south without surrendering the 
Ruse and Silistra fortresses, as in previous battl es. He planned to fight 
in the region between Ruse, Silistra and Shumen. However, 
Abdülkerim Pasha's expectation would not come true. It was very 
difficult for the Ottoman forces, which were positioned in the castles 
to the east of the Balkan Front, to sto p the Russian operation that 
would advance from Svishtov to the south.16 
The Russian plan was to cross the  Danube between Ruse and 
Nikopol without colliding with the strongly held Ottoman fortresses. In 
                                                           
14 Mustafa Öztürk, “1877 -1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi Belgeleri: Abdi Paşa'nın 
Muhakemesi”, Belgeler, 23/27, (2003), p. 125-126; Süer, op. cit., p. 71 
15 Erkan-ı Harbiye Kolağalarından Reşid, op. cit., p. 84-85. 
16 Keçecizade İzzet Fuat, Kaçırılan Fırsatlar, 1877-1878 Osmanlı -Rus Savaşı Hakkında  
Eleştiriler ve Askerî Düşünceler , Genelkurmay Basımevi, Ankara 1997,  p. 15 -16. 
Abdülkerim Pasha was tried in the court of war after he was dismissed. In his defense, 
he said that he had only 170 b attalions to defend the Danube and that he had warned 
the Chief of Staff Mahmud Pasha that this force was insufficient. According to 
Abdülkerim Pasha, İstanbul did not give the necessary importance to the Balkan Front. 
Öztürk, op. cit., p. 133. 
[s9] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      9 
 
order to hide the main crossing area and divert the at tention of the 
Ottoman army, a secondary force would cross the Danube from the 
Galati-Macin region and enter Dobruja and advance to the Constanta 
line. The main attacking force, after crossing the river, would advence 
rapidly to the south, seize the Balkan  passes, and advance in the 
direction of Edirne to divide the Ottoman forces into two parts. The 
Russian general headquarters wanted to be victorious in a short time 
by advancing rapidly to Istanbul. Thus, Britain and France would not 
have a chance to inte rvene militarily or diplomatically against Russia. 
According to the plan, the 8th, 9th, 12th and 13th corps, constituting 
the bulk of the Russian army, were positioned in front of Ni kopol-
Svishtov. While the 11th c orps was gathered agai nst Silistra, the 14 th 
corps was positioned against Galati.17 
The Russian force gathered at the front was about 200.000 men, 
including 182 infantry battalions, 204 cavalry squadrons and 858 
cannons.18 According to Ottoman sources, the Russian army had 
275.000 infantry, 20.000 c avalry and 756 cannons. 19 The army was 
commanded by the Tsar's brother, Grand Duke Nichola. 
When the strength of the two armies is compared, it is seen that 
the Russian army is superior in terms of the number of soldiers. The 
number of cannons  in the Ottoma n army was about half that of the 
Russians. In terms of the number of cavalry, the Russians had an 
absolute superiority. 20 This was a major disadvantage. Cavalry units 
played a very important role in the war tactics of the period. Cavalry 
units with high mo bility were of decisive importance in types of 
operations that required speed such as reconnaissance, encirclement, 
outflanking and pursuit operations. In order to eliminate this 
deficiency, muavene cavalry units (commonly known as başıbozuk) 
were formed f rom the immigrant Circassian tribes. The fact that the 
muavene cavalrymen joined the army with their own horses offered 
                                                           
17 Bruce W. Menning, Bayonets Bofore Bullets, The Imperial Russian Army 1861 -1914, 
Indiana University Press, Bloomington & Indianapolis, p. 52-55. 
18 Frederick Maurice, The Russo-Turkish War  1877, Swan Sonnenschein&Co., London 
1905, p. 25; Greene, op. cit., p. 140.  
19 Süer, op. cit., p. 48; According to B.W.Menning, the number of the Russian army is 
approximately 260.000. Menning, op. cit., p. 55. 
20 Greene, op. cit., p. 141.   
[s10] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           10 
 
an important advantage for the Ottoman army, which was generally 
suffering from animal shortages. 21 However, the combat effectiveness 
of the muavene cavalry units was quite low. These units were not 
acting in military discipline. They co uld not properly carry out the  
reconnaissance service, which is one of the most important duties of 
the cavalry units. With the rush to plunder, their order  was being 
broken in the battles. The Ottoman commanders at the front would 
complain a lot about this situation.22 
The weapons used by the Ottoman army were better than the 
Russians. Thanks to the extensive purchases made during the reign of 
Sultan Abdulazi z, the troops were equipped with modern and high 
quality weapons. The main weakness of the army was the lack of 
qualified officers. Since the beginning of the century, important steps 
have been taken to develop the military education system. However, 
at that time, military schools still could not train enough officers. For 
this reason, the number of officers with the skills and qualifications to 
command their troops deftly was insufficient. 23 Uneducated officers , 
which was not gtatuated from military schools , constituted 90% of the 
officer corps. Some of them could not read or write at all. Only 45 of 
the 70 pashas , who commanded the army during the war , were 
military school graduates. In  the lower ranks, the proportion of 
educated officers was even lower . These uneducated officers did not 
have the technical and tactical knowledge required by modern 
warfare. The number of staff officers in the entire Ottoman army 
consisted of 132.24  
                                                           
21 Mehmet Beşikçi, “Başıbozuk Savaşçıdan ‘Makbul’ Tebaaya: 1877 -1878 Osmanlı-Rus 
Savaşı’nda Osmanlı Ordusunda Çerkez Muhacirler”,  Hacettepe Üniversitesi Türkiyat 
Araştırmaları Dergisi, 23, (2015), p. 102. 
22 Hüseyin Raci Efendi, Zağra Müftüsünün Anıları, Tarihçe-i Vak’a-ı Zağra, Tercüman, p. 
153; Ali İhsan Gencer -Nedim İpek, “1877 -1878 Osm anlı-Rus Harbi Rumeli Cephesi 
Vesikaları (Temmuz 1877)”, Belgeler, 25/19, (1993), p. 233. 
23 Mesut Uyar- Edward J.Erickson, A Military History of The Ottomans, From Osman to 
Atatürk, Praeger Security International, California 2009, p. 177. 
24 Gültekin Yıldız, “Kara Kuvvetleri”, Osmanlı Askeri Tarihi: Kara, Deniz ve Hava 
Kuvvetleri, 1792 -1918, T imaş Yayınları, İstanbul 2013, p . 67; Türk Silahlı Kuvvetleri 
Tarihi,  1877 -1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harb î Kafkas Cephesi Harekâtı II, Genelkurmay 
Basımevi, Ankara 1985, p. 43. 
[s11] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      11 
 
The Ottoman commanders were having trouble in command of the 
troops. Because they had little preparation and experience until they 
came to command posts. Commanders of all levels were faced with 
many situations for the first time during the campaign, as the army did 
not conduct exercises and maneuvers in peacetime. Some experience  
was gained in the wars of Serbia and Montenegro. But this was only 
limited to the troops that participated in these wars. As a matter of 
fact, the experience of commanding the troops could only be gained in 
the campaign, but the experience gained on the b attlefield came at a 
heavy price.25 
The biggest problem of the Ottoman army was in the strategic 
command system. As it is known, Müşir Abdülkerim Nadir Pasha was 
appointed as the Front Commander. However, II. Abdülhamit did not 
intend to leave the command of the war to Abdülkerim Pasha. As a 
matter of fact, a war council ( Meclis-i Umuru Harbiye) was established 
in Istanbul on May 24. The war council consisted of  Chief of General 
Staff, Minister of the Navy and some other military personnel.26  
While the members of the council were elected, their loyalty to the 
Sultan was taken into account rather than their military careers. For 
this reason, it was not possible for the pashas in the military council to 
oppose the Sultan's wishes. The S ultan, who closely follow ed all the 
events on the front line, would try to command the war from Istanbul 
through the war council. However, the distance from Istanbul to the 
front headquarters was more than 450 kilometers. Communication 
facilities between the front and Istanbul were extremely limited. It was 
not possible for the situation at the front to reach Istanbul on time and 
clearly. A three -headed system was created for the management of 
the war. The Sultan and the military council would constantly interfere 
with the decision s of the Front Commander. The commanders at the 
front would not be able to react quickly and would have to get 
approval from Istanbul for all their decisio ns. The decisions taken by 
the S ultan and the council members, who did not know the real 
situation at the front, would have a negative effect on the command 
                                                           
25 Gazi Ahmed Muhtar Paşa, Anılar-2, Sergüzeşt -i Hayatımın Cild -i Sanisi , Tarih Vakfı 
Yurt Yayınları, İstanbul 1996, p. 80. 
26 BOA, İ.DH., 748/61133. 
[s12] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           12 
 
of the war. As a matter of fact, the confusion of strategic command 
could not be overcome until the end of the war.27 
From the Beginning of the War to the Third Battle of Pleven 
The Russian army entere d Romanian territory on April 24 and 
completed its deployment within two months. On the other hand, the 
Ottoman army made no attempt to restrict and prevent the activities 
of its enemy in Romania. The destruction of the Barboshi bridge, which 
the Russians had to use to cross the Seret River, was important in 
slowing the movement of the enemy. This measure was considered by 
the Ottoman headquarters, but the Ru ssians were more agile and 
succeeded in seizing the bridge. 28 The Ottoman army remained 
motionless throughout the Russian deployment. Reconnaissance 
operations were not carried out in the north of the Danube, and spies 
were not used properly. Ottoman comman ders were largely unaware 
of the Russian preparations north of the river.29 
The operation started with the Russian troops (25.000 men and 108 
guns) crossing the Danube and entering Dobrudja on 22 June. It was a 
deception. The Russians wanted to draw th e att ention of the 
Ottomans to Dobruja . The task of the force that entered Dobruja was 
to advance to the Constanta line and ensure the safety of the Russian 
army in Romania. The Ottoman force in the region (15.000 men and 40 
cannons) could not prevent the river  crossing and quickly retreated to 
the Constanta line.30 The Russian army had easily reached its target at 
east of the Danube. 
On the other hand, the Russian troops deployed against Svishtov 
approached the Danube and started to cross the river on 26 June. 
Thanks to the imprudence of the Ottoman troops in Svishtov, the 
Russians had crossed the river much more easily than they had 
                                                           
27 Mahmud Celaleddin Paşa, op. cit., p. 310; Uyar-Erickson, op. cit., p. 183-184. 
28 Augustus Charles Hobart -Hampden, Hobart Pasha , Nel son Daubleday, New York 
1915,  p. 220. 
29 Mehmed Hulusi, Niçin Mağlub Olduk: 1877 -78 Osmanlı -Rus Seferi: Avrupa 
Cephesindeki Harekât, Kayhan Yayınları, İstanbul 2021, p. 74. 
30 Erkan-ı Harbiye Kolağalarından  Reşid, op. cit. , p.  38;  Tsenko Genov, “Military 
Operations in the Balkan Theatre during the 1877 -78 War”,  Southeastern 
Europe/L’europe Du Sud-Est, 6, Pt.2, (1979), p. 139. 
[s13] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      13 
 
expected. The Ottoman forces (4000 men), who could not resist in 
Svishtov, had to withdraw to Tırnovo in a short time. The Russians  
completed the construction of a bridge on July 2, and succeeded in 
passing a large amount of forces across the Danube. Russian troops 
advanced rapidly to the south and captured Tırnovo on 7 July.31 
The Ottoman defense could not react effectively during the  river 
crossing, which was the most critical stage of the Russian operation. 
The Ottoman troops in the region were not strong enough and were 
not well commanded. The commanders had a tendency to withdraw 
immediately in the face of enemy pressure. Abdulkeri m Pasha should 
have acted quickly . Because the Russian forces, which were able to 
cross the Danube until July 2, were relatively weak. It was obvious that 
the Russian force crossing the river would increase in a short time. 
Under these conditions, it was possible to move towards Svishtov with 
the troops in Ruse and Nikopol. During this time Ottoman attacks 
could put the Russians in a very difficult position. Thus, time would be 
gained for the forces in Shumen to catch up and the Russians could be 
prevented from crossing the Danube.  But the Front Commander 
missed this opportunity by remaining inactive.32 
Grand Duke Nikola did not face the difficulties he expected in the 
Danube. He was thinking of advancing swiftly to the Balkan passes 
with the majority of his forces while securing his flanks with secondary 
forces. However, the Tsar was concerned about the Ottoman 
deployment in Shumen and the forces in the fortresses.  Therefore, he 
stopped the advance until the Russian troops in Romania had crossed 
the river. After completing the river crossing, the Russian army was to 
divide into three groups and continue its operation. While the central 
group (8th Corps) was advancing towards the Balkan passes, the left 
flank group (XII and XIII Corps) would advance west and h old the 
                                                           
31 R.Grant Barnwell, The Russo-Turkish War, John E. Potter And Company, Philadelphia 
1877, s. 481-484; Maurice, op. cit., p. 61-65. 
32 Abdulkerim Pasha, in his defense at the Court of War, said that the Russians mainly 
planned to cross the Danube through Tutrakan, that he prevented this with the 
measures he took and that they had to pas s through Svishtov. He stated that he 
thought the operation in Svishtov might be a deception, that he was waiting for the 
main operation in Ruse, and that there was not enough force in Ruse to re inforce 
Svishtov.  Öztürk, op. cit., p. 129-130. 
[s14] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           14 
 
Yantra line. Thus, it would cover the operation of the central group 
against the Ottoman forces in Shumen and Ruse. On the other hand, 
the right flank group (9th Corps) was going to occupy Nikopol and 
Pleven against a possible operation of Osman Pa sha corps in Vidin. 33 
This pause in the Russian advance was an important opportunity. 
However, Abdülkerim Pasha would not be able to take advantage of 
this opportunity. 
While the Russian operation continued, the Ottoman forces in 
Shumen and Ruse  (the Danube Eastern Army)  remained inactive. 
However, while a small part of the Russian troops had crossed the 
Danube, the Danube Eastern Army could have prevented the crossing 
and threatened the left flank of the Russian troops advancing south. 
With an e ffective attack, the Russian forces could be split in two and 
their withdrawal paths could be cut off. However, Abdulkerim Pasha 
remained motionless in hesitation. He left the initiative entirely to the 
Russians. Istanbul, on the other hand, was worried ab out the Russian 
advance. Abdülkerim Pasha, who h ad to act on the orders of the 
Sultan himself, dispatched a corps (34 battalions and 40 cavalry 
squadrons) from Shumen to Byala on 3 July. 34 This force under the 
command of Ahmet Eyüp Pasha engaged in battle w ith the Russian 
forces in the east of Byala on 9 July. However, Abdulkerim Pasha 
panicked and ordered a withdrawal to Shumen on 11 July.35 
The advance force of the Russian central group was under the 
command of General Gurko. As a result of the reconnaissan ce he had 
made from Tırnovo, Gurko  learned that the Hainköy s trait was 
defended with a very weak force.  The Russians took advantage of this 
                                                           
33 Greene, op. cit., p. 164; Menning, op. cit., p. 57-58. 
34 Abdülkerim Pasha, in his defense in the court of war, said that he planned to 
prevent the Russians from reaching the Balkan passes by sending hiz force to 
Omurtag.However, Istanbul intervened and demanded that  the forces be dispatched 
in the di rection of Svishtov . Abdülkerim Pasha complained that he could not take the 
measures he thought because of such interventions. Öztürk, op. cit., p. 131. 
35 Mehmed Hulusi, op. cit. , p. 100-102; Süer, op. cit. , p. 134-137; According to the 
decision taken by Abdülkerim Pasha together with Serasker Redif Pasha and Nazım 
Pasha, the Ahmet Eyüp Pasha corps would not advance on the enemy, but would 
retreat and draw the enemy on itself. Gencer-İpek, op. cit., p. 229. 
[s15] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      15 
 
opportunity and captured the pass on 14 July. 36 Russian troops 
advanced south from the Hainköy pass and captured Kaz anlak on 17 
July. The main goal for the Russians was to capture the Shipka pass. 
Russian attacks, from Gabrovo on 17 July and from the south on 18 
July to Shipka pass, had failed. However, the weak Ottoman force 
defending Shipka withdrew on the night of 18/19 July and emptied the 
pass. The strategically important Shipka pass was captured by the 
Russians on 19 July. Russian troops entered the Stara Zagora on July 
22.37 Thus, the road to the south of the Balkan Mountains was opened. 
The Sultan was panicked by the news from the front and sent the 
Chief of General Staff Redif Pasha and Nazım Pasha to the front. Redif 
Pasha, who came to Shumen on July 4, said  in the reports he sent to 
the Sultan that the army did not have enough strength and supported 
Abdulkerim P asha's decision to stay on the defensive. 38 The Sultan, 
who lost his patience in the face of the defeats, dismissed Abdülkerim 
and Redif Pashas from their duties on 17 July. On July 21, Mehmet Ali 
Pasha was appointed as the General Commander of the Danube 
Armies and Süleyman Pasha as the Balkan Com mander.39 Abdülkerim 
and Redif Pashas were tried in the court of war and sentenced to exile. 
The first target of the Russian right flank group (IX Corps) was 
Nikopol. There was an Ottoman force of 10.000 men in the city under 
the command of Hasan Pasha. Osm an Pasha had informed Hasan 
Pasha that he would come to help in a few days while he was leaving 
Vidin. The Russians attacked on July 15, but could not capture the city. 
However, Hasan Pasha panicked and surrendered on 16 July. The 
Russians had captured 700 0 prisoners in Nikopol. After two days of 
preparation, the Russians dispatched a force to Pleven on 18 July. 40 
However, they were late. 
                                                           
36 Nikolay Epan chin, Operations of General Gurko’s Advance Guard in 1877 , 
çev.H.Havelock, Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner Co., London 1900, p. 54-64 . 
37 Barnwell, op. cit. , p. 504-507; Alexander Statiev, “The Thorns of the Wild Rose: 
Russian Ordeals at the Shipka Pass During  the Russo-Turkish War of 1877 –1878”, The 
Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 32/3, p. 369-371. 
38 The Ottoman Ministry of War evaluated the strength of the Russian army, which 
attacked from the Danube, as 160.000-180.000. BOA, A.}MKT.MHM., 481/100.  
39 Ahmed Midhat Efendi, op. cit., p. 204-207.  
40 Greene, op. cit., p.  185-189. 
[s16] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           16 
 
The Ottoman Danube Western Army remained motionless in Vidin, 
although the Russians crossed the Danube in the first days of the war. 
Osman Pasha offered to the Front Commander to go to Pleven with his 
forces, to meet with the Nikopol forces there, and then to attack 
Svishtov in coordination with the Danube Eastern Army. Abdulkerim 
Pasha, who did not want to leave Vidin defenseless, did not accept this 
offer. However, due to the rapid advance of the Russian army, he 
changed his mind and ordered Osman Pasha to advance to Pleven. 
However, a telegram from Istanbul delayed Osman Pasha's advance 
for a few days. The intelligence t hat the Russians would attack Vidin 
would not turn out to be true. Osman Pasha departed from Vidin with 
most of his forces on 13 July . On the way, he learned that N ikopol had 
fallen and reached Pleven on 19 July after a difficult 190 -kilometers 
walk. Pleve n was located at the crossroads of the roads leading to 
western Bulgaria and the Balkan passes. 41 The deployment of a strong 
Ottoman unit in the city was threatening the right flank of the Russian 
forces advancing south. The Russians (13.000 infantry, 3 cav alry 
regiments and 60 guns) were able to reach the city on 20 July and 
attacked immediately. However, Osman Pasha (27 battalions, 1 cavalry 
regiment and 46 guns) defeated the Russians and forced them to 
withdraw. Russian casualties were over 2700. If the r etreating troops 
were followed, the Russian defeat would have turned into a rout. 
However, after days of marching, the soldiers were exhausted and 
Osman Pasha did not have enough cavalry forces. Osman Pasha 
immediately sent a force and took Lovech back. 42 The First Battle of 
Pleven had been an important turning point in the war. For the first 
time, the Ottoman forces were able to stop a strong Russian attack 
and forced them to retreat. 
The defeat in Pleven greatly disturbed the Tsar. Grand Duke 
Nichola attempted to gather a new force to remove this obstacle that 
                                                           
41 The city of Pleven was located at the intersection of five critical roads. These ways; 
Nikopol-Pleven road, Ruse -Byala-Pleven road, Plovdiv -Lovech-Pleven road, Sofia-
Orhanie-Pleven road and Vidin -Pleven road.  Ahmet Cemal (Cemal Pasha ), Plevne 
Müdafaası, Ötüken, İstanbul 2020, p. 39. 
42 Albay Talat, Plevne Savunması , Gene lkurmay Basımevi, Ankara 1997, p . 4-12; Von 
Der Goltz, Plevne: Tarih-i Harpten Asakir -i Redife Kısmına Dair Tedkikat , Mahmud Bey 
Matbaası, İstanbul 1316 (1898), p. 4-13; Maurice, op. cit., p. 106-113. 
[s17] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      17 
 
threatened the right flank of his army as soon as possible. The force 
gathered under the command of General Krudener was 30 .000 men, 
including 36 battalions, 30 cavalry squadrons and 176 cannons. 43 On 
the other hand, Osman Pasha began to fortify the city. The force in 
Pleven was about 20.000 men, including 33 battalions, 5 cavalry 
squadrons and 300 Circassian volunteers. Before the attack on the city, 
General Kru dener wanted to take control of the Pleve n-Sevlievo-
Tırnovo road by seizing Lovech. However, his attack on Lovech on 28 
July was unsu ccessful. Thereupon, General Kru dener attacked Pleven 
on 30 July. But he was defeated again. Russian casualties amounted to 
7000 men. If the panicked Russian troops  had been pursued, the 
defeat would have turned into a rout. But Osman Pasha had very little 
cavalry and his troops were exhausted in battle.44 
The Russians, who had been advancing easily since the beginning of 
the war, were defeated twice in Pleven. The ef fect of the defeat 
spread to the entire army. The Russian General Headquarters was very 
concerned about this situation. In these circumstances, Grand Duke 
Nichola wanted to attack again quickly. However, the Tsar did not 
approve of this. The Russians were also under the pressure of the 
Ottoman Danube Eastern Army in the east and the Balkan Corps in the 
south. If the forces gathered in front of Pleven and were defeated 
once again, the Russian army would be defenseless against the 
Ottoman forces in the east a nd south. In this situation, the Tsar 
decided to bring reinforcements from Russia. In addition, the 
Romanian army would participate in the Pleven campaign. 45 There 
would be no operation to Pleven until reinforcements were gathered . 
Throughout August, the Ru ssians were busy with the attacks of 
Süleyman Pasha and Mehmet Ali Pasha. 
During the days of the Pleven defeat, bad news was also coming 
from the south of the Balkans for the Russians. While General Gurko 
captured the Balkan passes in mid -July, the Ottoman  forces in Sliven 
and Nova Zagora remained inactive. Having captured Shipka, the 
                                                           
43 Hozier, op. cit., p. 591; Greene, op. cit., p. 194. 
44 İbrahim Edhem, Plevne Hatıraları, İstanbul 1979, p. 44-46; Süer, op. cit., p. 230-247; 
Mehmed Hulusi, op. cit., p. 136-138; Menning, op. cit., p. 62-64. 
45 Greene, op. cit., p. 203-205. 
[s18] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           18 
 
Russian troops were advancing towards the Nova Zagora. It seemed 
that the road to Edirne was opened for the Russians. However, the 
situation was about to change. The Ottoman f orces in Montenegro 
under the command of Süleyman Pasha received orders to transfer to 
Eastern Rumelia on 3 July. These forces were transported by sea from 
the Adriatic coast and arrived in Alexandroupolis on 21 July. Süleyman 
Pasha proceeded to Nova Zagor a via Edirne without wasting any time. 
He took the forces in Sliven and Nova Zagora under his command and 
formed the Balkan corps (42 battalions and 2 cavalry squadrons) and 
advanced to the Stara Zagora on 29 July. 46 His plan was to push the 
Russians to the  north of the Balkan passes, and then to force them to 
withdraw to  the Danube in coordinated attacks with the Danube 
Eastern Army. Süleyman Pasha recaptured the Stara Zagora on July 31 
and the Nova Zagora on August 3 and drove the Gurko forces to the 
Hainköy Pass. The Russian advance in the south of the Balkans was 
halted.47 
Mehmet Ali Pasha, who was appointed as the General Com mander 
of the Danube Armies, arrived in Shumen on 21 July. He decided to 
gather the scattered forces in the Danube Eastern Army and form a 
strong attack group. By the end of July, a force of 58 infantry 
battalions, 38 cavalry squadrons and 96 guns had gath ered in Razgrad. 
However, he did not find this force sufficient to take the offensive and 
requested reinforcements from Istanbul to gather a force of about 100 
battalions.48 It was a big mistake that Mehmet Ali Pasha did not attack 
quickly. After the defeat in Pleven, the Russians had the opportunity to 
recover and bring reinforcements from Russia.49 
By the beginning of August, the Ottoman army had gained some 
advantages. The Russian advance was stopped in Pleven and a large 
enemy force was engaged there. The  Russians were driven from the 
south of the Balkan Mountains and a strong Ottoman force deployed 
                                                           
46 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V.2, Askeri Mecmua, 11, (1928), p. 5. 
47 Nikolay Epanchin, op. cit., p. 257-277; Ahmed Saib, op. cit., p. 169-178.  
48 Süer, op. cit., p. 206-207. 
49 At the end of August, Istanbul estimated that the Russian force in the Balkans was 
248.000 men, of which 150 .000 were combatants and the rest were non -combatant 
personnel. BOA, Y.PRK.ASK. 1/40. 
[s19] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      19 
 
against Shipka. Besides, the Danube Eastern Army gathered in the 
Razgrad-Omurtag region with its main force. If these groups could 
attack in coordination, the Russian army could be driven to the 
Danube. But that would not be possible. The forces in Razgrad, Shipka 
and Pleven could not act in coordination to support each other. 
Because there was a serious discord among the Ottoman commanders 
at the front. Mehmet Ali Pasha, who was appointed as the General 
Commander of the Danube Armies, had just risen to the rank of Müşir. 
Süleyman and Osman Pasha were his seniors. This caused a reaction. 
The forces in Shipka and Pleven acted as if they were independent. 
The attit ude of Istanbul made the situation even more complicated. 
There was mutual distrust and rivalry between Mehmet Ali Pasha and 
Süleyman Pasha. In fact, Mehmet Ali Pasha was acting more like the 
Eastern Army commander rather than Front Commander. The Sultan, 
bypassing the Front Commander, was directly communicating with 
Süleyman and Osman Pashas and giving orders. 50 Under these 
conditions, it was not possible to establish a unity of command. 
Süleyman Pasha captured Nova Zagora on 3 August and the 
Russians withdrew to the Balkan passes. He was planning to attack the 
Shipka pass. At the same time, the Danube Western Army would 
attack from the east and the Danube Eastern Army from the west. 
Thus, the enemy would be stuck between the three armies. 51 
However, Mehmet A li Pasha did not agree.  He wanted Süleyman 
Pasha to come to the north of the Balkans via Elena and Omurtag with 
his main force and join the Danube East ern Army.52 He was thinking of 
forcing the Russians to withdraw with the attack of his own forces 
from the east and the Danube Western Army from the west. Thus, the 
Ottoman forces would not have to attack a fortified position like 
Shipka. However, Süleyman Pasha was reluctant to go to the north of 
the Balkans with his forces and to enter the command of Mehmet  Ali 
                                                           
50 For the correspond ence between Süleyman Pasha, Mehmet Ali Pasha and Istanbul, 
see. Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V.3, Erkan-ı Hârbiye-i Umumiye Onuncu 
Şubesi, 1928, p. 1-171; Süer, op. cit., p. 181. 
51 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık , V .2, s. 28 -29; Rumeli Orduları 
Başkumandanı Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa’nın 93 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi Hatıraları , Çelik 
Yayınevi, İstanbul 2021, p. 57. 
52 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V.2, p. 114. 
[s20] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           20 
 
Pasha. He wanted a victory on his own. Both sides were complaining 
about each other to Istanbul, but neither the Sultan nor the Military 
Council could solve the crisis at the front. As a result, the two 
commanders did not agree on a coordinated attack  that would 
support each other. Thus, the Russians had the opportunity to bring 
reinforcements from Tırnovo at the most critical moments of the 
Battle of Shipka.53 
Süleyman Pasha, who decided to attack Shipka, had to move 
quickly before the Russians could m ake defense preparations. 
However, he lost time with the preparations for the attack, and the 
Shipka attack could only begin on August 21. In this way, the Russians 
had the opportunity to bring reinforcements and strengthen the 
defense. The Ottoman force deployed against Shipka was 28.000 men. 
However, the attack that continued for six days against the fortified 
positions in a narrow strait was not successful. Ottoman casualties 
were about 7000 men. Süleyman Pasha realized that he could not 
seize the pass w ith his strength and stopped the attack. He attacked 
Shipka once again on September 16. However, he was defeated again 
and had to withdraw.54 
Mehmet Ali Pasha played an important role in the loss of the Battle 
of Shipka by not taking action. The force gathe red in Razgrad had 
reached 67 battalions, 44 cavalry squadrons and 22 batteries by the 
end of August.55 But Mehmet Ali Pasha could not dare to attack due to 
the false intelligence he received about the enemy. He carried out 
some limited targeted attacks with the warning of Istanbul, but did not 
dare to a decisive battle. These attacks were made without a center of 
gravity and were not well commanded. The Russians withdrew from 
                                                           
53 Mehmed Hulusi, op. cit., p. 146, 158-162; Erkan-ı Harbiye Kolağalarından Reşid, op. 
cit., p. 51-52. 
54 Barnwell, op. cit., p. 510-521; Greene, op. cit., p. 209-215. 
55 In a report submitted to the S ultan on September 10, the state of force was shown 
as follows. Danube East Army; 39 battalions in Ruse, 30 battalions in Silistra, 48 
battalions in Shumen, 11 battalions in Varna and 15 battalions in Dobrici. Danube 
Western Army; 20 battalions in Vidin, Lom and Rahova, 52 in Pleven, 32 in Sofia, 
Berkovitsa and Orhanie. BOA, Y. PRK. ASK, 1/42. 
[s21] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      21 
 
the Lom line and established a new line of defense just behind it.56 The 
pressure from Istanbul was increasing day by day. Finally, Mehmet Ali 
Pasha planned a massive attack at the beginning of October, but could 
not find the opportunity to implement it. The Sultan dismissed 
Mehmet Ali Pasha on October 2 and appointed Süleyman Pasha as t he 
Commander of the Danube Army.57 
From the Third Battle of Pleven to the End of the War 
After surviving the Ottoman offensives in August, the Russians 
turned their attention back to Pleven. Capturing this critical city would 
unlock the war. Meanwhile, Osma n Pasha made a great effort to 
improve the defense of the city. He was also trying to disrupt the 
Russians by making limited attacks on critical areas around Pleven. 
However, the Russian force against him was growing more and more. 
With reinforcements from  Russia and the participation of the 
Romanian army, the forces around Pleven had increased to four corps 
(74.000 infantry, 10.000 cavalry and 442 cannons). The Russians also 
brought heavy siege artillery. 58 The Ottoman force was approximately 
40 thousand, including 35.000 infantry, 3000 cavalry, 1000 artillery 
and 80 cannons.59 
The first step of the Pleven operation would be th e capture of 
Lovech. The force defending the city consisted of 8 infantry battalion s 
and 6 cannons. The Russian force prepared for the attack on the city 
consisted of 25 battalions, 4 regiments of cavalry and 30 cannons. The 
Russians attacked on 1 September. Although the Ottoman forces 
suffered great losses, they lasted until September 3 . Only two 
battalions were able to withdraw to Pleven. Osman Pasha, who 
learned that Lovech was in danger, took action with 22 battalions on 3 
                                                           
56 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V .3, s. 3-4; Maurice, op. cit., p. 152-159; 
Süer, op. cit., p. 311. 
57 Ahmed Midhat Efendi, op. cit., p. 256-262; Keçecizade İzzet Fuat, op. cit., p. 46-48. 
58 Greene, op. cit., p. 234; According to H. Süer, the Russian force against Pleven was 
96.000 infantry, 20.000 cavalry and 458 cannons. Süer, op. cit., p. 360. 
59 Albay Talat, op. cit., p. 45; According to William von Herbert, the force in the city 
was 30.000 men and 72 cannons. William von Herbert, The Defence of Plevna 1877 , 
Smith, Elder&Co., London 1911, p. 181.   
[s22] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           22 
 
September to help. However, when he approached the city, he saw 
that he was late and he return to Pleven.60 
The Third Battle of Pleven began with Russian bombardment on 7 
September. While the Russian artillery heavily fired the fortifications 
around the city, the offensive forces were positioned for the attack. 
The defenders were trying to respond despite the insuffic ient number 
of guns and ammunition. In addition, Ottoman forces were making 
limited attacks against Russian positions. The fortifications destroyed 
by artillery fire were being repaired at night s. After four days of 
bombardment, on September 11, the Russia n-Romanian army 
attacked. The Russians attacked in three groups. But these groups 
could not act in coordination. In this way, Osman Pasha could move 
troops to critical points within the defense lines. Due to the 
determined defense of the Ottoman forces, th e Russians suffered 
great losses. They managed to seize some fortifications around the 
city. However, Osman Pasha took back most of these bastions with 
counterattacks. By the evening of September 12, the Russian 
casualties had exceeded 20.000  men. Ottoman casualties were about 
4000 men. While the Russo -Romanian forces were withdrawing in 
panic, the Ottomans were unable to carry out a pursuit operation once 
again.61 
After being defeated for the third time in Pleven, the Russians gave 
up the offensive. In this  case, two courses of action are possible. The 
first was to leave a sufficient force in front of Pleven and march on 
Edirne with the rest of the army. However, the Tsar did not approve of 
this plan. It was very dangerous to advance to the south of the Balkans 
without capturing Pleven. As a result, it was decided to besiege the 
city and cut off its contact with the outside. In order to besiege Pleven, 
reinforcements had to come from Russia. A large cavalry force was 
sent to the Pleven -Sofia road to isolate t he city. However, the Russian 
                                                           
60 Herbert, op. cit., p. 178-181.   
61 In different sources, different numbers are given for the casualties of the R ussian-
Romanian army between 18.000 -25.000 and for the Ottoman casualties between 
3000-5000 men. Charles S. Ryan - John Sandes, Under The Red  Crescent, Charles 
Scribner's Sons, New York 1897, p . 225-238; Francis Stanley,  St.Petersburg to Plevna , 
Richard Bentley and Son, London 1878, p . 187 -203; Herbert, op. cit. , p. 221-223; 
İbrahim Edhem, op. cit., p. 52-57.   
[s23] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      23 
 
cavalry could not prevent the Ottomans from bringing supplies to 
Pleven via Orhanie. The last Ottoman reinforcements arrived in the 
city on 8 October. But the Russian force around Pleven continued to 
increase. General Gurko ca ptured Radomirtsi on 28 October and 
forced the Ottoman forces to withdraw to Orhanie. The siege was 
completed when the Russians captured the Orhanie-Pleven road.62 
Osman Pasha has been  criticized for not leaving Pleven when he 
had the opportunity. Actually,  Osman Pasha knew that he would be 
besieged and he wanted to withdraw from Pleven at the beginning of 
October. He would retreat to Orhanie and be positioned there, 
preventing the Russians from advancing to the south of the Balkans. In 
case of staying in Pl even, the Orhanie-Pleven supply route had to be 
kept open. However, Istanbul did not accept the withdrawal and failed 
to keep the Orhanie -Pleven road open. 63 The war council gave 
permission to withdraw from Pleven at the end of October, but it was 
too late.64 
The Russian army was stuck around Pleven. The pause in the 
Russian operation was an important opportunity for the Ottomans.  
But this opportunity would be wasted. Mehmet Ali Pasha had planned 
a general offensive at the beginning of October. But Suleyman Pasha, 
who was appointed as the Commander -in-Chief of the Danube Army 
on October 2, did not consider the preparations for the attack 
sufficient. He began preparations for the offensive again. By mid -
October the strength of the Danube East ern Army had reach ed 
118.000 men (71.800 in the field army and 46.400 in the forts). 
However, Istanbul saw an offensive move as very dangerous and 
wanted to wait for the enemy's move.65  The orders sent from Istanbul 
to the front were  uncertain and inconsisted. These left Sü leyman 
Pasha in indecision. 
                                                           
62 Alexander Jacob Schem, War In The East:  An Illustrated History of the Conflict 
Between Russia, H.S.Goodspeed & Co., New York 1878,  p. 323-326; Maurice, op. cit., 
p. 247-257; Barnwell, op. cit., p. 573-574. 
63 Mahmud Celaleddin Paşa, op. cit., p. 470-471; Ahmed Midhat Efendi, op. cit., p. 272-
277; Süer, op. cit., p. 454. 
64 BOA, Y.EE, 76/26. 
65 Süer, op. cit., p. 418-421. 
[s24] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           24 
 
Rescuing the forces in Pleven was possible only with a coordinated 
attack of the Danube Eastern Army, the Balkan Corps and the forces in 
Sofia. However, Süleyman Pasha could not get support from the 
commanders at the front.  The  incompatibility between the Ottoman 
commanders prevented cooperation. Rauf Pasha, who was brought to 
the Balkan Command after Süleyman Pasha, was hostile to him. Rauf 
Pasha complained about Süleyman Pasha to Istanbul and said that he 
did not want to work under his command. Rauf Pasha achieved his 
goal at the end of November and was appointed as the commander of 
the reserve army. Shortly after, he became the Chief of the General 
Staff. After Rauf Pasha, Ahmet Eyüp Pasha was appointed as the 
Balkan Commander. However, in a short time, conflict arose between 
Ahmet Eyüp Pasha and Süleyman Pasha. Ahmet Eyüp Pasha was 
dismissed on 20 December and replaced by Veysel Pasha. On the other 
hand, Mehmet Ali Pasha, who was dismissed from the front command, 
was appointed to the command of the forces in Sofia. Like Rauf Pasha, 
Mehmet Ali Pasha did not cooperate with Süleyman Pasha. Mehmet 
Ali Pasha planned an operation from Orhanie to open the way to 
Pleven. However, he was not successful and was replaced by Şakir 
Pasha. It was a big mistake that these three commanders, who could 
not work together, were assigned to the Balkan front at the same 
time. Istanbul did nothing to correct this mistake.66 
The Ottoman headquarters spent October in indecision. According 
to Suleyman Pasha, the Russian plan was to march to Sofia via Pleven 
and from there to the south of the Balkans and advance to Edirne. In 
order to prevent the Russians, the Orhaniye region had to be defended 
strongly and the forces in Pleven had to be saved. For this pur pose, 
Süleyman Pasha planned a coordinated operation. He would lead a 
force of 40 battalions to be taken from the Danube Eastern Army and 
the Balkan corps, and he would personally advance to Radomirtsi. At 
the same time, Osman Pasha would break the siege a nd unite with 
Süleman Pasha force in Radomirtsi. However, Istanbul did not accept 
                                                           
66 Uyar-Erickson, op. cit., p. 191-192; Ahmed Saib, op. cit., p. 282-287. 
[s25] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      25 
 
this and demanded a new plan. 67 As the Ottomans wasted valuable 
time, the siege in Pleven was approaching to the end. 
By mid -November, the Ottoman and Russian armies were hold ing 
their current positions. Süleyman Pasha was planning to move his 
headquarters to Edirne in order to communicate easily with the forces 
in Shipka and Sofia. This plan worried the Sultan a lot. Because the 
Sultan had severe suspicions against Süleyman Pa sha because of his 
role in the dethronement of Sultan Abdülaziz. As a result, he did not 
allow Süleyman Pasha to leave Razgrad. 68 In this situation, Süleyman 
Pasha decided to take action with the Danube Eastern Army. He would 
attack Elena to attract the attention of the Russians and would allow 
Osman Pasha to withdraw from Pleven. Süleyman Pasha captured 
Elena on 4 December. The road to Tırnovo was opened. But Mehmet 
Ali Pasha in Sofia did not act on Pleven. The  Balkan corps also did not 
support this offensive. Under these conditions, Süleyman Pasha could 
not continue the offensive towards Tırnovo. 69 Once again, an 
important opportunity was missed because of the disagreement 
between the commanders at the front. 
By the end of November, Pleven had no hope of salvation. General 
Gurko captured Orhanie on 28 November and forced Mehmet Ali 
Pasha to withdraw. The Russo -Romanian force around the city had 
totaled 160.000 men, including 191 battalions, 120 cavalry squadrons 
and 650 cannons. The Ottoman force was about 40.000 men, including 
30.000 combatants. There were not enough supplies and ammunition 
stored in the city. By December supplies had run out. Nearly 4000 
soldiers had died in the last six weeks, most of them from  disease.70 
Osman Pasha had planned to break the siege with a sudden attack and 
withdraw to Sofia rather than surrender. The Ottoman forces leaving 
Pleven on 10 December . They  were able to break through the first 
siege line, but could not advance any furthe r. The Ottoman army lost 
                                                           
67 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V .4, Erkan-ı Hârbiye-i Umumiy e Onuncu 
Şubesi, 1928, p. 1. 
68 Rumeli Orduları Başkumandanı Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa’nın 93 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi 
Hatıraları, s. 64-65; Süer, op. cit., p. 431-432. 
69 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V.4, p. 19-20. 
70 Greene, op. cit., p. 290-298; Herbert, op. cit., p. 306 
[s26] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           26 
 
about 6000 casualties in the battle. After Osman Pasha was injured, 
the Pleven army had to surrender. 71 Osman Pasha was personally 
visited by Grand Duke Nichola and Romanian Prince Charles and 
congratulated for his heroic defense.72 
The fall of Pleven changed the course of the war, and the Russian 
forces, gathered around the city for siege , was released. The Russian 
force gathered at the front had exceeded 300.000 men. In addition, 
Serbia declared its independence on December 16 and d eclared war 
on the Ottoman Empire. Some of the Ottoman forces in Sofia had to 
engage in the Serbian operation. Two ideas were put forward at the 
Russian headquarters for the next phase of the operation. According 
to some commanders, it was very dangerous t o advance to the south 
of the Balkans under winter conditions and the Ruse fortress had to be 
captured first. Grand Duke Nichola, on the other hand, wanted to 
move quickly to the south of the Balkans via Sofia and march on 
Edirne. Finally, the second opini on prevailed. 73 The Ottoman plan, on 
the other hand, was to stop the Russian army at the Balkan passes and 
prevent its advance to the south of the Balkans. According to Istanbul, 
if the Russian army could be stopped for a while, diplomacy would 
come into pl ay and the war would come to an end. For this purpose, 
Istabul requested that a force of 60 battalions be shifted from the 
Danube Eastern Army to the south of the Balkan Mountains.74 
The Russians took action on December 28. General Gurko (65.000 
infantry, 6 000 cavalry and 280 guns) advanced from Orhanie and 
captured Sofia on January 3, 1878. 75 Ottoman forces withdrew to 
Pazardzhik and started to establish a new defense line. Süleyman 
Pasha was planning to collect his forces in Edirne and establish a new 
line of defense. Edirne was in the middle of the front and the center of 
the telegraph lines. He wanted to move his headquarters to Edirne. 
But the Sultan, who was worried that Süleyman Pasha would be so 
                                                           
71 Albay Talat, op. cit., p. 111-118; İbrahim Edhem, op. cit., p. 67-73; Henry Hozier, op. 
cit., p. 715-725. 
72 Stanley,  op. cit., p. 239-241. 
73 Greene, op. cit., p. 323-324 
74 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V.4, p. 220-221; Ahmed Saib , op. cit., p. 
305-306; Menning, op. cit., p. 57. 
75 Maurice, op. cit., p. 292-293. 
[s27] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      27 
 
close to the capital, did not allow it. Istanbul forced Süleyman Pasha to 
go to the defense  line in Pazardzhik. Süleyman Pasha, who came to 
Panagüriste, was ten hours away from the nearest telegraph center. 
While he was at the headquarters in Panagüriste, it was not possible 
for him to learn the developments in time and give orders quickly. The 
Front Commander was paralyzed.76 
While the Ottoman army was trying to establish a defensive line in 
Pazardzhik, the Russians attacked Shipka. General Radetzky's forces 
(56.000 infantry, 2000 cavalry and 252 guns) were divided into three 
groups. While the central group attacked directly, t he other two 
groups advanced from the east and west of the pass to encircle the 
Ottoman troops. The Russian operation was successful and the 
Ottoman troops at Shipka surrendered on January 9. 77 The situation 
was very critical for the Ottoman army. The Russians could march from 
Shipka to Edirne and surround the Ottoman forces in Pazardzhik from 
behind. Under these conditions, all Ottoman forces had to be 
withdrawn to Edirne quickly and a new defense line had to be 
established. The Ottoman army could gain time by defending in Edirne 
and the Russians could be persuaded to an armistice during this time. 
But Istanbul made a big mistake. The Ottoman government decided to 
ask for an armistice on 8 January. In this context, all troops were 
ordered to keep their posit ions and not to withdraw. Istanbul was 
acting as if an armistice had been signed. However, the Russians did 
not respond to the armistice offer and continued to advance. All 
troops had to be withdrawn to Edirne quickly, but Istanbul prevented 
this. Süleyman  Pasha lost two days to get approval from Istanbul to 
withdraw to Edirne.78   
                                                           
76 Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık , V .2, p . 161 -162; Rumeli Orduları 
Başkumandanı Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa’nın 93 Osmanlı-Rus Harbi Hatıraları, p. 75-78. 
77 Richard Graf von Pfeil, Experiences of a Prussian Officer in the Russian Service During 
the Turkish War of 1877 -1878, Edward Stanford,  London 1893, p . 184-204; Alexander 
Statiev, “A Hitch on the Path to Glory: The Breakthrough Across the Balkan Ridge 
During the Russo-Turkish War of 1877–78”, The Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 32/4, 
(2019) p. 519-522 ; Hozier, op. cit., p. 798-803. 
78 Süleyman Hüsnü  Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık , V .4, p . 350; Rumeli Orduları 
Başkumandanı Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa’nın 93 Osmanlı-Rus Harbi Hatıraları, p. 79-82. 
[s28] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           28 
 
The Russians took advantage of this opportunity and from the 
north they advenced to the withdrawal route of the forces in 
Pazardzhik. General Gurko, on the other hand, was pushing  the 
Ottoman forces by advancing from the west. Süleyman Pasha could 
not hold on to Plovdiv. His retreat path was also cut off. Stuck between 
two Russian forces, Suleyman Pasa panicked and headed for the 
Rhodope Mountains. The Ottoman forces passed through  the passes 
in the mountains and reached Komotini and Xanthi in a devastated 
state.79 Suleyman Pasha was planning to gather his forces again and 
transport them to Alexandroupoli by sea and reach Edirne. However, 
he wouldn't have enough time for that. 
The Russians captured Plovdiv on January 17. Edirne road was 
completely opened. The weak Ottoman force gathered in the city 
withdrew on 19 January. The Russians entered Edirne on 20 January 
without any resistance. Meanwhile, Ahmet Muhtar Pasha, who was 
called from the Caucasus Front, was trying to establish a defense line 
in Çatalca. But it was a hopeless effort. Only 25.000 men were able to 
gather in Çatalca in a miserable condition. Russian forces reached 
Çatalca on 29 January. The Sultan saw that the situati on was hopeless 
and appli ed to the Tsar on 13 January to request  an armistice. 
Armistice talks started on 20 January and were signed on 31 October 
in Edirne. The Russian army entered Çatalca on 6 February. Grand 
Duke Nichola established his headquarters in  San Stefano the next 
day.80 The war was over. 
Conclusion 
The war of 1877 -1878 was a tough exam for the Ottoman army.  
But he failed in this exam. There were many reasons for the defeat. In 
particular, mistakes made in strategic command were decisive in the  
defeat. While the Ottoman campaign was being planned, the course of 
action that the Russians would follow could not be predicted correctly. 
Ottoman decision makers had acted with wrong predictions. The 
Ottomans thought that the Russians would not go to th e south of the 
                                                           
79 Erkan-ı Harbiye Kolağalarından Reşid, op. cit. , p. 60-61; Keçecizade İzzet Fuat, op. 
cit., p. 112-114; Greene, op. cit., p. 338-347. 
80 Gazi Ahmed Muhtar Paşa, op. cit., p. 284-289; Mehmed Hulusi, op. cit., p. 204-208. 
[s29] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      29 
 
Balkans without capturing the Danube fortresses as in the previous 
wars, but they were wrong. Therefore, an incorrect deployment was 
made. The Danube River and the Balkan Mountains, which were the 
main defense lines, were not defended with s ufficient forces. As a 
matter of fact, the Russian army was able to cross the Danube easily 
and captured the Balkan passes in a very short time. The Ottoman 
forces, which were deployed very dispersedly, could not react by 
gathering on time. 
The Ottoman arm y entered the war with a wrong plan and 
improper deployment. However, bigger mistakes were made in the 
command of the war. Three generals commanded the Ottoman forces 
in the Balkans throughout the war. Of these, only Abdülkerim Pasha 
had authority over the army commanders. However, he could not take 
the necessary measures against the rapidly developing Russian 
operation and was dismissed in a short time. Mehmet Ali Pasha and 
Süleyman Pasha never had the opportunity to act as front 
commanders. Incompatibility and personal struggles between frontline 
commanders paralyzed the command system. This situation worsened 
with the interventions  of Istanbul on the front. The S ultan's desire to 
conduct the war from Istanbul , destroyed the unity of command. The 
repeated interventions of both the S ultan and the military council 
destroyed the weak authority of the front commanders. Under these 
conditions, it was not possible for the Ottoman forces gathered in 
Shumen, Shipka and Pleven to carry out a coordinated operation. T he 
Ottoman forces, which could not act together against the enemy, were 
defeated piece by piece. On the other hand, the Russian army was 
commanded from one hand throughout the war and the Tsar did not 
leave the army. 
  The only significant success of the O ttoman army on the Balkan 
Front was the defense of Pleven, which lasted for five months. 
Ottoman soldiers proved to the whole world, how well they could fight 
under the command of a competent and determined commander like 
Osman Pasha. However, the advantag e gained through the defense of 
Pleven could not be used properly. With the defeat at the end of the 
war, the Ottoman rule in the Balkans was largely eliminated. The great 
migration from the Balkans to Anatolia due to the war had important 
[s30] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           30 
 
political and social consequences. With the war of 1877-1878, another 
step was taken on the way to the end of the Ottoman Empire. 
 
 
References 
Primary Sources 
Turkish Rebublic Presidency Ottoman Archives (BOA)  
BOA, İ.DH., 748/61133, (24 May 1877). 
BOA, A.}MKT.MHM., 481/100, (21 July 1877). 
BOA, Y.PRK.ASK., 1/40, (26 August 1877). 
BOA, Y. PRK. ASK, 1/42, (10 September 1877). 
BOA, Y.EE, 76/26, (29 October 1877). 
 
Books and Articles 
Ahmed Midhat Efendi, Zübdetü’l Hakayık, 93 Harbi’nin Arka Planı , Türk 
Tarih Kurumu, Ankara 2015. 
Ahmet Cemal (Cemal Pasha), Plevne Müdafaası, (Ötüken, İstanbul 2020 
Ahmed Saib, Son Osmanlı-Rus Muharebesi, Hindiye Matbaası, Kahire 1327 
(1911). 
Albay Talat, Plevne Savunması, Genelkurmay Basımevi, Ankara 1997. 
Beşikçi, Mehmet, “Başıbozuk Savaşçıdan ‘Makbul’ Tebaaya: 1877 -1878 
Osmanlı-Rus Savaşı’nda Osmanlı Ordusunda Çerkez Muhacirler”, Hacettepe 
Üniversitesi Türkiyat Araştırmaları Dergisi, 23, (2015), p. 85-124. 
Barnwell, R.Grant, The Russo -Turkish War , John E.Potter And Company, 
Philadelphia 1877. 
Epanchin, Nikolay, Operations of General Gurko’s Advance Guard in 1877 , 
(Translated by H.Havelock), Kegan Paul, Trench, Trübner Co., London 1900.   
Erkan-ı Harbiye Kolağalarından Reşid, 1293 Osmanlı -Rus Sefer -i Ahiri , 
Kayıhan Yayınları, İstanbul 2016. 
Gazi Ahmed Muhtar Paşa, Anılar-2, Sergüzeşt -i Hayatımın Cild -i Sanisi , 
Tarih Vakfı Yurt Yayınları, İstanbul 1996. 
Gencer, Ali İhsan -İpek, Nedim, “1877 -1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi Rumeli 
Cephesi Vesikaları (Temmuz 1877)”, Belgeler, 25/19, (1993), p. 205-244. 
Genov, Tsenko, “Military Operations in the Balkan Theatre during the 
1877-78 War”,  Southeastern Europe/L’europe Du Sud -Est, 6, Pt.2 (1979), p. 
136-153. 
Greene, Francis Vinton, Russian Army and its Campaigns in Turkey in 
1877-1878, D. Appleton&Company, New York 1879. 
[s31] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      31 
 
Herbert, William von, The Defence of Plevna 1877 , Smith, Elder&Co., 
London 1911. 
Hobart-Hampden, Augustus Charles, Hobart Pasha , Nelson Daubleday, 
New York 1915. 
Hozier, Henry Montague, The Russo -Turkish War I -III-IV, Willi am 
Mackenzie, London 1878. 
İbrahim Edhem, Plevne Hatıraları, İstanbul 1979. 
Jelavich, Barbara, History Of The Balkans, Eighteenth a nd Nineteenth 
Centuries I, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1995. 
Karal, Enver Ziya, Osmanlı Tarihi VIII, Birinci Meşrutiyet ve İstibdat Devirleri 
(1876-1908), Türk Tarih Kurumu, Ankara 2007. 
Keçecizade İzzet Fuat, Kaçırılan Fırsatlar, 1877-1878 Osmanlı -Rus Savaşı 
Hakkında Eleştiriler ve Askerî Düşünceler , Genelkurmay Basımevi, Ankara 
1997. 
Kurat, Akdes Nimet, Türkiye ve Rusya, Kültür Bakanlığı Yayınları, Ankara 
1990. 
Kurat, Yuluğ Tekin, “1877 -1878 Osmanlı-Rus Harbinin Sebepleri”, Belleten, 
26, (1962), p. 562-597. 
Mahmud Celaleddin Paşa, Mir’at-ı Hakikat , Berekat Yayınevi, İstanbul 
1983. 
Maurice, Frederick, The Russo -Turkish War  1877, Swan Sonnenschein, & 
Co., London 1905. 
Mehmed Hulusi, Niçin Mağlub Olduk: 1877 -78 Osmanlı-Rus Seferi: Avrupa 
Cephesindeki Harekât, Kayhan Yayınları, İstanbul 2021. 
Menning, Bruce W., Bayonets Bofore Bullets, The Imperial Russian Army 
1861-1914, Indiana University Press, Bloomington & Indianapolis.  
Öztürk, Mustafa, “1877 -1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi Belgeleri: Abdi Paşa'nın 
Muhakemesi”, Belgeler, 23/27, (2003), p. 117-139. 
Pfeil, Richard Graf von, Experiences of a Prussian Officer in the Russian 
Service During the Turkish War of 1877-1878, Edward Stanford,  London 1893. 
Rumeli Orduları Başkumandanı Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa’nın 93 Osmanlı -Rus 
Harbi Hatıraları, Çelik Yayınevi, İstanbul 2021. 
Ryan, Charles S. -Sandes, John, Under The Red Crescent , Charles Scribner's 
Sons, New York 1897. 
Schem, Alexander Jacob, War In The East:  An Illustrated History of the 
Conflict Between Russia, H.S.Goodspeed & Co., New York 1878. 
Stanley, Francis, St.Petersburg to Plevna, Richard Bentley and Son, London 
1878. 
Statiev, Al exander, “A Hitch on the Path to Glory: The Breakthrough 
Across the Balkan Ridge During the Russo -Turkish War of 1877 –78”, The 
Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 32/4, (2019), p. 507-525. 
[s32] Umut Akçakaya                                                                                                                           32 
 
Statiev, Alexander, “The Thorns of the Wild Rose: Russian Ordeals at the 
Shipka Pass During the Russo -Turkish War of 1877 –1878”, The Journal of 
Slavic Military Studies, 32/3, (2019), p. 367-387. 
Süer, H.Hikmet,  1877-1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbi  Rumeli Cephesi , 
Genelkurmay Basımevi, Ankara 1993. 
Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V.2, Askeri Mecmua, S.11, 1928. 
Süleyman Hüsnü Paşa, Umdetü’l Hakâyık, V .3-4, Erkan-ı Hârbiye -i 
Umumiye Onuncu Şubesi, 1928. 
Türk Silahlı Kuvvetleri Tarihi,  1877 -1878 Osmanlı -Rus Harbî Kafkas 
Cephesi Harekâtı II, Genelkurmay Basımevi, Ankara 1985. 
Uyar, Mesut-Erickson, Edward J., A Military History of The Ottomans, From 
Osman to Atatürk, Praeger Security International, California 2009. 
Von Der Goltz , Plevne: Tarih -i Harpten Asakir-i Redife Kısmına Dair 
Tedkikat, Mahmud Bey Matbaası, İstanbul 1316 (1898). 
Yasamee, F.A.K.,  Ottoman Diplomacy, Abdülhamid II and the Great 
Powers, 1878-1888, Gorgias Press, New Jersey 2011. 
Yıldız, Gültekin, “Kara Kuvvetleri”, Osmanlı Askeri Tarihi:  Kara, Deniz ve 
Hava Kuvvetleri, 1792 -1918, (Ed.Gültekin Yıldız), T imaş Yayınları, İstanbul 
2013, p. 35-78. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
[s33] How to Lost a War                                                                                                                      33 
 
APPENDICES 
Appendix 1. Balkan Front  Operations in the Ottoman-Russian War of 
1877-1878 
 
 
