https://encyclopedia.ushmm.org/content/en/article/the-armenian-genocide-1915-16-overview
The Armenian Genocide (1915-16): Overview | Holocaust Encyclopedia
 Skip to main content 
 Menu 
 Must Reads  ▾ 
 Introduction to the Holocaust 
 Eyshishok: The Annihilation of a Jewish Community 
 Mass Shootings at Babyn Yar (Babi Yar) 
 Invasion of Poland, Fall 1939 
 What does war make possible? 
 World War II: In Depth 
 The British Policy of Appeasement toward Hitler and Nazi Germany 
 1944: Key Dates 
 Antisemitism: An Introduction 
 Home 
 Search 
 Language 
 English
 ▾ 
 عربي (Arabic)
 汉语 (Chinese)
 فارسی (Farsi)
 français (French)
 Deutsch (German)
 Ελληνικά (Greek)
 हिंदी (Hindi)
 Magyar (Hungarian)
 Indonesia (Indonesian)
 Italiano (Italian)
 日本語 (Japanese)
 한국어 (Korean)
 polski (Polish)
 Português - Brasil (Portuguese-Brazil)
 русский (Russian)
 Español (Spanish)
 Türkçe (Turkish)
 Українська (Ukrainian)
 اُردو (Urdu)
 Featured Content
 Tags
 Find topics of interest and explore encyclopedia content related to those topics
 Browse A-Z
 Find articles, photos, maps, films, and more listed alphabetically
 For Teachers
 Recommended resources and topics if you have limited time to teach about the Holocaust
 ID Cards
 Explore the ID Cards to learn more about personal experiences during the Holocaust
 Timeline of Events
 Explore a timeline of events that occurred before, during, and after the Holocaust.
 Audio Narrations
 Explore all content with human-read audio versions.
 Must Reads
 Introduction to the Holocaust
 Eyshishok: The Annihilation of a Jewish Community
 Mass Shootings at Babyn Yar (Babi Yar)
 Invasion of Poland, Fall 1939
 What does war make possible?
 World War II: In Depth
 The British Policy of Appeasement toward Hitler and Nazi Germany
 1944: Key Dates
 Antisemitism: An Introduction
 About this site 
 Close menu
 Search the Holocaust Encyclopedia
 Enter your search term here 
 Content types 
 All categories 
 ▾ 
 Animated Map
 Article
 Artifact
 Audio
 Discussion Question
 Document
 Film
 ID Card
 Map
 Media Essay
 Oral History
 Photo
 Series
 Song
 Timeline
 Timeline Event
 Clear Selections 
 Language 
 English 
 عربي (Arabic) 
 汉语 (Chinese) 
 فارسی (Farsi) 
 français (French) 
 Deutsch (German) 
 Ελληνικά (Greek) 
 हिंदी (Hindi) 
 Magyar (Hungarian) 
 Indonesia (Indonesian) 
 Italiano (Italian) 
 日本語 (Japanese) 
 한국어 (Korean) 
 polski (Polish) 
 Português - Brasil (Portuguese-Brazil) 
 русский (Russian) 
 Español (Spanish) 
 Türkçe (Turkish) 
 Українська (Ukrainian) 
 اُردو (Urdu) 
 ▾ 
 Search 
 Trending keywords: 
 Close search menu
 Your browser is out of date and may not support some of the features of this webpage. Please consider updating your browser or using another.
 More information about this image 
 The Armenian Genocide (1915-16): Overview
 The Armenian genocide (1915–1916) refers to the physical destruction of Armenian Christian people in the Ottoman Empire. It is sometimes referred to as the first genocide of the 20th century. 
 Key Facts
 1 
 About 1.5 million Armenians lived in the Ottoman Empire in 1915. 
 2 
 The Armenian genocide took place between the spring of 1915 and the fall of 1916. At least 664,000 and possibly as many as 1.2 million Armenians were killed. They died in both massacres and individual killings. They were also killed through systematic ill-treatment, exposure, and starvation. 
 3 
 The plight of the Armenians in the Ottoman Empire triggered a response in the United States. Public philanthropic efforts were unprecedented. 
 Close Image Lightbox
 Skip complementary section (continue reading)
 Cite 
 Share 
 Print 
 Tags 
 World War I 
 Armenian genocide 
 mass atrocities 
 genocide 
 Language 
 English 
 This content is available in the following languages
 Arabic (عربي) 
 French (français) 
 Russian (русский) 
 Turkish (Türkçe) 
 Close language menu
 View this term in the glossary
 [caption=294a24ff-1c4c-4a89-801b-be806581c52b] - [credit=294a24ff-1c4c-4a89-801b-be806581c52b] 
 Sometimes called the first genocide of the twentieth century, the Armenian genocide refers to the physical annihilation of Armenian Christian people living in the Ottoman Empire from spring 1915 through autumn 1916. There were approximately 1.5 million Armenians living in the multiethnic Ottoman Empire in 1915. At least 664,000 and possibly as many as 1.2 million died during the genocide, either in massacres and individual killings, or from systematic ill treatment, exposure, and starvation.
 Media Essay
 The Armenian Genocide (Media Essay) 
 The Armenian genocide refers to the physical annihilation of ethnic Armenian Christian people living in the Ottoman Empire from spring 1915 through autumn 1916.
 Item 1 of 2 
 Items 1 through 1 of 2 
 Items 1 through 1 of 2 
 Ottoman military forces march Armenians to an execution site 
 Ottoman military forces march Armenian men from Kharput to an execution site outside the city. Kharput, Ottoman Empire, March 1915-June 1915. [Courtesy of the Armenian National Institute.]
 Deportation of Armenians 
 Ottoman troops guard Armenians being deported. Ottoman Empire, 1915-16.
 Armenian children lie in the street of an unidentified town 
 Armenian children lie in the street of an unidentified town. Photograph taken by Armin T. Wegner. Wegner served as a nurse with the German Sanitary Corps. In 1915 and 1916, Wegner traveled throughout the Ottoman Empire and documented atrocities carried out against the Armenians . [Courtesy of Sybil Stevens (daughter of Armin T. Wegner). Wegner Collection, Deutsches Literaturarchiv, Marbach & United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.]
 Armenian deportees 
 A small group of Armenian deportees walking through the Taurus Mountain region, carrying bundles. A woman in the foreground carries a child. Ottoman Empire, ca. November 1915. Photograph taken by Armin T. Wegner. Wegner served as a nurse with the German Sanitary Corps. In 1915 and 1916, Wegner traveled throughout the Ottoman Empire and documented atrocities carried out against the Armenians . [Courtesy of Sybil Stevens (daughter of Armin T. Wegner). Wegner Collection, Deutsches Literaturarchiv, Marbach & United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.]
 Armenian families in a refugee camp 
 Armenian families next to makeshift tents in a refugee camp. Ottoman Empire, 1915-16. Photograph taken by Armin T. Wegner. Wegner served as a nurse with the German Sanitary Corps. In 1915 and 1916, Wegner traveled throughout the Ottoman Empire and documented atrocities carried out against the Armenians . [Courtesy of Sybil Stevens (daughter of Armin T. Wegner). Wegner Collection, Deutsches Literaturarchiv, Marbach & United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.]
 Armenian refugees 
 A group of Armenian refugees. 1915 – 20.
 Sometimes called the first genocide of the twentieth century, the Armenian genocide refers to the physical annihilation of Armenian Christian people living in the Ottoman Empire from spring 1915 through autumn 1916. There were approximately 1.5 million Armenians living in the multiethnic Ottoman Empire in 1915. At least 664,000 and possibly as many as 1.2 million died during the genocide , either in massacres and individual killings, or from systematic ill treatment, exposure, and starvation.
 Armenian refugees in the desert 
 Armenian refugees in the desert. A man in the foreground lies on the ground on a layer of bedding. 1915 – 20.
 An Armenian refugee 
 An Armenian refugee, wearing a scarf and a pack on her back. Ottoman Empire, 1918-20.
 Sometimes called the first genocide of the twentieth century, the Armenian genocide refers to the physical annihilation of Armenian Christian people living in the Ottoman Empire from spring 1915 through autumn 1916. There were approximately 1.5 million Armenians living in the multiethnic Ottoman Empire in 1915. At least 664,000 and possibly as many as 1.2 million died during the genocide, either in massacres and individual killings, or from systematic ill treatment, exposure, and starvation.
 Armenian refugees 
 Armenian refugees. Ottoman Empire, 1918 – 20.
 An Armenian woman and her child 
 An Armenian woman and her child sit on a sidewalk next to a bundle of their possessions. Ottoman Empire, 1918–20.
 Armenian refugee children 
 A group of 1,500 Armenian children at a refugee camp of the Near East Relief organization in Alexandroupolis. Greece, 1921–22.
 Armenian refugees 
 Refugees foraging at Alexandropol, Russian Armenia. Photograph taken by John Elder. In 1917, Elder, a divinity student from Pennsylvania, joined the American Committee for Armenian and Syrian Relief team that was aiding refugees. For two years, Elder did volunteer work with Armenian orphans. During that time, he photographed refugees and conditions at camps.
 The origin of the term genocide and its codification in international law have their roots in the mass murder of Armenians in 1915–16. Lawyer Raphael Lemkin , the coiner of the word and later its champion at the United Nations, repeatedly stated that early exposure to newspaper stories about Ottoman crimes against Armenians was key to his beliefs about the need for legal protection of groups (a core element in the UN Genocide Convention of 1948).
 Ottoman authorities, supported by auxiliary troops and at times by civilians, perpetrated most of the persecution and mass killing. The Ottoman government, controlled by the Committee of Union and Progress (CUP; also called the Young Turks), aimed to solidify Muslim Turkish dominance in the regions of central and eastern Anatolia by eliminating the sizeable Armenian presence there.
 Mass atrocities and genocide are often perpetrated within the context of war. The destruction of the Armenians was closely linked to the events of World War I . Fearing that invading enemy troops would induce Armenians to join them, in spring 1915 the Ottoman government began the deportation of the Armenian population from its northeastern border regions. In the months that followed, the Ottomans expanded deportations from almost all provinces regardless of distance from combat zones.
 The victims of the Armenian genocide include people killed in local massacres that began in spring 1915; others who died during deportations, under conditions of starvation, dehydration, exposure, and disease; and Armenians who died in or en route to the desert regions of the southern Empire [today: northern and eastern Syria, northern Saudi Arabia, and Iraq]. In addition, tens of thousands of Armenian children were forcibly removed from their families and converted to Islam.
 Photo
 An Armenian refugee (Photo) 
 An Armenian refugee, wearing a scarf and a pack on her back. Ottoman Empire, 1918-20.
 Sometimes called the first genocide of the twentieth century, the Armenian genocide refers to the physical annihilation of Armenian Christian people living in the Ottoman Empire from spring 1915 through autumn 1916. There were approximately 1.5 million Armenians living in the multiethnic Ottoman Empire in 1915. At least 664,000 and possibly as many as 1.2 million died during the genocide, either in massacres and individual killings, or from systematic ill treatment, exposure, and starvation.
 Credits: 
 Photothèque CICR (DR) / s.n.
 US Ambassador to Constantinople Henry Morgenthau Sr. was deeply troubled by the atrocities committed against the Armenians and was among those who sought to rouse the world's conscience in response. The plight of the Armenians triggered an unprecedented public philanthropic response in the United States, involving President Woodrow Wilson, Hollywood celebrities, and many thousands of Americans at the grassroots level who volunteered both domestically and abroad and raised over $110 million (over $1 billion adjusted for inflation) to assist Armenian refugees and orphans.
 The Armenian genocide cast a long shadow into the Holocaust era. Ambassador Morgenthau's son, Henry Morgenthau Jr. , was secretary of the treasury in the administration of Franklin D. Roosevelt . In part due to his memories of the Armenian genocide, Morgenthau Jr. was a key advocate for the establishment of the War Refugee Board which rescued as many as 200,000 Jews from Nazi Europe. Perhaps most hauntingly, a novel about Armenian self-defense (Franz Werfel's The Forty Days of Musa Dagh ) was secretly passed from hand-to-hand among Jews imprisoned in ghettos during the Holocaust, who saw in it an inspirational analogy to their plight and a call to resistance.
 Last Edited: Nov 7, 2024 
 Author(s):
 United States Holocaust Memorial Museum, Washington, DC
 See Also
 World War I and the Armenian Genocide 
 Article 
 The Armenian Genocide (1915-16): In Depth 
 Article 
 Glossary Terms
 Critical Thinking Questions
 Investigate how the rest of the world learned about the Armenian genocide.
 What responsibilities do other nations have regarding mass murder within another country?
 The word “genocide” was coined in 1944. Investigate how and when the term has been applied since then.
 Further Reading
 Adalian, Rouben, ed.  The Armenian Genocide in U.S. Archives, 1915–1918 . Alexandria: Chadwick-Healey, 1991.
 Akçam, Taner.  The Young Turks' Crime against Humanity: The Armenian Genocide and Ethnic Cleansing in the Ottoman Empire . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2012.
 Bloxham, Donald.  The Great Game of Genocide: Imperialism, Nationalism and the Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005.
 Dündar, Fuat.  Crime of Numbers: The Role of Statistics in the Armenian Question . New Brunswick, N. J.: Transaction, 2010.
 Kaiser, Hilmar. "Genocide at the Twilight of the Ottoman Empire," in  The Oxford Handbook of Genocid e  Studies , edited by Donald Bloxham and A. Dirk Moses. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.
 Kévorkian, Raymond.  The Armenian Genocide: A Complete History.  New York: I.B. Tauris, 2011.
 Miller, Donald E. and Lorna Touryan Miller.  Survivors: An Oral History of the Armenian Genocide.  Berkeley-Los Angeles: University of California Press, 1993.
 Morgenthau, Henry.  Ambassador Morgenthau's Story.  Princeton: Gomidas Institute, 2000.
 Suny, Ronald Grigor et al., eds.,  A Question of Genocide: Armenians and Turks at the End of the Ottoman Empire . New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
 Üngör, Ugur Ümit.  The Making of Modern Turkey: Nation and State in Eastern Anatolia, 1913–1950 . New York: Oxford University Press, 2011.
 Feedback 
 Thank you for supporting our work
 We would like to thank Crown Family Philanthropies, Abe and Ida Cooper Foundation, the Claims Conference, and BMF for supporting the ongoing work to create content and resources for the Holocaust Encyclopedia.
 View the list of all donors .
 Glossary
 Full Glossary 
 Close glossary
 100 Raoul Wallenberg Place, SW
Washington, DC 20024-2126
 Main telephone: 202.488.0400
 TTY: 202.488.0406
 Get the Latest News
 E-mail Address 
 Postal Code 
 Plan Your Visit
 Current Exhibitions
 Calendar of Events
 Support the Museum
 Donate
 Learn
 Teach
 Collections
 Academic Research
 Remember Survivors and Victims
 Genocide Prevention
 Antisemitism and Holocaust Denial
 Outreach
 Holocaust Encyclopedia
 Collections Search
 Holocaust Survivors and Victims Resource Center
 History Unfolded
 Experiencing History
 Early Warning Project
 About the Museum
 Contact the Museum
 Terms of Use
 Privacy
 Accessibility
 Legal