URL https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/567/
 Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the Tiwanaku Culture - UNESCO World Heritage Centre World Heritage Convention Help preserve sites now ! Explore UNESCO English English Français Login Our expertise About World Heritage News Events The Convention Convention Text Basic Texts Operational Guidelines Policy Compendium Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage Governing Bodies The General Assembly The Committee Resolutions / Decisions Sessions since 1976 The States Parties The Advisory Bodies Funding World Heritage Fund Financial regulations International Assistance The Emblem Questions and answers The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who / Contacts Director of the World Heritage Centre Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Europe & North America Latin America and the Caribbean The List Global Strategy Criteria Upstream Process Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations World Heritage List New Inscribed Properties UNESCO Sites Navigator Interactive Map World Heritage in Danger The List in Danger Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2026-2030 Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring List of factors affecting the properties Success Stories Examples of the Convention at work Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve. Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures Browse case studies Featured Activities Indicators Culture|2030 World Heritage Cities Programme Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape Cultural Landscapes Capacity Building Category 2 Centres Natural World Heritage Climate Change and World Heritage World Heritage Marine Programme World Heritage and Biodiversity Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples World Heritage Education Programme World Heritage Volunteers Initiative World Heritage and Sustainable Development Sustainable Tourism Programme World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict. Our Partners Donate Partnerships Marketplace Our Partners Civil Society Donate Publications Publications Paper Series Urban Notebooks Brochures & Info kits Resource Manuals Other materials Newsletter Review Wall Map Documents Resources Search Glossary About this Website Terms / Policies Syndication Site Map Useful Websites Search search World Heritage Convention Explore UNESCO --> close Search search Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information. search tune Filter By Properties By States Parties By Regions Danger Site Delisted Transboundary / Transnational Year Inscribed Themes All Cities Cultural Landscape Forest Marine & coastal Earthen Architecture Criteria with only with Cultural Criteria: i ii iii iv v vi Natural Criteria: vii viii ix x Keywords Category Cultural Natural Mixed Media All With videos With photo gallery Display with the brief description Without With Display component parts Less component parts All Component parts Order by Country Region Year Name of the property Search The List Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of ... Print Share on social media Facebook Twitter UNESCO social media Facebook Youtube Twitter RSS World Heritage Terms / Policies Syndication Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the Tiwanaku Culture Description Maps Documents Gallery Video Indicators Assistance Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the Tiwanaku Culture The city of Tiwanaku, capital of a powerful pre-Hispanic empire that dominated a large area of the southern Andes and beyond, reached its apogee between 500 and 900 AD. Its monumental remains testify to the cultural and political significance of this civilisation, which is distinct from any of the other pre-Hispanic empires of the Americas. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Tiwanaku : centre spirituel et politique de la culture tiwanaku La ville de Tiwanaku fut la capitale d'un puissant empire préhispanique qui étendit son influence sur une vaste zone des Andes méridionales et au-delà, et atteignit son apogée entre 500 et 900 de notre ère. Les vestiges de ses monuments témoignent de l'importance culturelle et politique de cette civilisation qui se distingue nettement des autres empires préhispaniques des Amériques. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 التيواناكو: المركز الروحي والسياسي لثقافة تيواناكو كانت مدينة تيواناكو عاصمة لإمبراطورية قوية بسطت نفوذها قبل الغزو الإسباني على منطقة واسعة من الأنديز الجنوبية وغيرها من المناطق وبلغت ذروتها بين العام500 و900 ب.م. وتشهد آثار هذه المواقع على الأهمية الثقافية والسياسية التي ترتديها هذه الحضارة المتميّزة عن سائر الإمبراطوريات السابقة للغزو الإسباني في الأميركيتين. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 蒂瓦纳科文化的精神和政治中心 蒂瓦纳科城(Tiwanaku)是古拉丁美洲印第安王国的首都，当时这一强大的帝国统治了南安第斯山脉及之外的广阔地区。公元500年至900年间，蒂瓦纳科城达到了鼎盛时期。这一地区的文明与美洲其他地方的古拉丁美洲帝国文明有所不同，其历史遗迹证明了这一文明在文化和政治上的重要性。 source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Древний город Тиауанако: духовный и политический центр доиспанской индейской культуры Город Тиауанако, столица мощной доиспанской империи, которая господствовала на огромном пространстве, занимаемом Южными Андами и их окрестностями, достигла своего апогея в период с 500 до 900 гг. н.э. Памятники свидетельствуют о культурной и политической значимости этой цивилизации, которая выделяется среди всех других доиспанских империй Америки. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Tiwanaku: centro espiritual y político de la cultura Tiwanaku Tiwanaku fue la capital de un poderoso imperio prehispánico que alcanzó su apogeo entre los años 500 y 900 de nuestra era. Su influencia se extendió por una vasta zona de los Andes meridionales y otras regiones adyacentes. Los vestigios de sus monumentos atestiguan la importancia cultural y política de una civilización netamente diferenciada de las restantes culturas prehispánicas de América. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 ティワナク：ティワナク文化の宗教的・政治的中心地 ボリビア東部、チチカカ湖の南16kmの高原に残る謎に包まれた都市遺跡。アンデス山脈以南の広大な地域を支配し、スペイン支配以前の帝国の紀元500～900年に最盛期を迎えた首都跡である。中心はティワナク文化特有の様式をもつ2つの巨大なピラミッド廃墟と、カラササヤの神殿複合建築。当時の姿を今に伝えるこの遺跡は、スペイン支配以前のアメリカ大陸のどの文化とも異なっており、文化的・政治的に重要な存在であったことを物語る。 source: NFUAJ Tiwanaku: spiritueel en politiek centrum van de Tiwanaku cultuur De stad Tiwanaku – hoofdstad van een krachtig pre-Spaans rijk – domineerde een groot deel van de zuidelijke Andes en verder. In de 8e eeuw na Christus ging het Tiwanaku rijk z'n meest invloedrijke fase in. In de uitgestrekte regio werden veel dochtersteden of kolonies opgericht. De belangrijkste daarvan was Wari in Peru dat zich later tegen Tiwanku keerde. De politieke dominantie van Tiwanaku begon af te nemen in de 11e eeuw en het rijk stortte de eerste helft van de 12e eeuw in. De monumentale overblijfselen getuigen van de culturele en politieke betekenis van deze beschaving, die zich onderscheidt van andere pre-Spaanse rijken van Amerika. Source: unesco.nl English French Arabic Chinese Russian Spanish Japanese Dutch add Outstanding Universal Value Brief synthesis Tiwanaku is located near the southern shores of Lake Titicaca on the Altiplano, at an altitude of 3,850 m., in the Province of Ingavi, Department of La Paz. Most of the ancient city, which was largely built from adobe, has been overlaid by the modern town. However, the monumental stone buildings of the ceremonial centre survive in the protected archaeological zones. Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the Tiwanaku Culture began as a small settlement which later flourished into a planned city between 400 A.D. and 900 A.D. The maximum expression of this culture is reflected in the civic - ceremonial organized spatially with a centre oriented toward to the cardinal points, constructed with impressive ashlars stones carved accurately and equipped with a complex system of underground drainage that was controlling the flow of rain waters. The public - religious space of this city is shaped by a series of architectural structures that correspond to different periods of cultural accessions: Temple Semi-underground, Kalasasaya's Temple, Akapana's Pyramid, Pumapumku's Pyramid. In addition, the area politician - administrative officer is represented by structures as the Palace of Putuni and Kantatallita. This architectural complex reflects the complex political structure of the period and its strong religious nature. The most imposing monument at Tiwanaku is the Pyramid of Akapana. It is a pyramid originally with seven superimposed platforms with stone retaining walls rising to a height of over 18m. Only the lowest of these and part of one of the intermediate walls survive intact. Investigations have shown that it was originally clad in sandstone and andisite and surmounted by a temple. It is surrounded by very well-preserved drainage canals. The walls of the small semi-subterranean temple (Templete) are made up of 48 pillars in red sandstone. There are many carved stone heads set into the walls, doubtless symbolizing an earlier practice of exposing the severed heads of defeated enemies in the temple. To the north of the Akapana is the Kalasasaya, a large rectangular open temple, believed to have been used as an observatory. It is entered by a flight of seven steps in the centre of the eastern wall. The interior contains two carved monoliths and the monumental Gate of the Sun, one of the most important specimens of the art of Tiwanaku. It was made from a single slab of andesite cut to form a large doorway with niches (Hornacinas) on either side. Above the doorway is an elaborate bas-relief frieze depicting a central deity, standing on a stepped platform, wearing an elaborate head-dress, and holding a staff in each hand. The deity is flanked by rows of anthropomorphic birds and along the bottom of the panel there is a series of human faces. The ensemble has been interpreted as an agricultural calendar. The settlers of this city perfected the technology for carving and polishing different stone materials for the construction, which, together with architectural technology, enriched the monumental spaces. . The economic base of this city is evidenced through the almost 50.000 agricultural fields, known locally as Sukakollos, characterized by their irrigation technology which allowed the different cultures to easily adapt to the climate conditions. The artificial terraces constitute an important contribution to agriculture and made possible a sustained form of farming and consequently the cultural evolution of the Tiwanaku Empire. These innovations were subsequently taken up by succeeding civilizations and were extended as far as Cuzco. The social dynamics of this population of the highland plateau were sustained in strong religious components that are expressed in a diverse iconography of stylized of zoomorphic and anthropomorphous images. The political and ideological power represented in different material supports extended to the borders coming up to the population’s vallunas and to more remote coastal areas. Many towns and colonies were set up in the vast region under Tiwanaku rule. The political dominance of Tiwanaku began to decline in the 11th century, and its empire collapsed in the first half of the 12th century. Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the Tiwanaku Culture is one of the urban accessions the most important pre-Inca of the Andean region of South America. Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the Tiwanaku Culture was the capital of a powerful empire that lasted several centuries and it was characterized by the use of new technologies and materials for the architecture, pottery, textiles, metals, and basket-making. It was the epicentre of knowledge and ‘ saberes’ due to the fact that it expanded its sphere of influence to the interandean valleys and the coast. The politics and ideology had a religious character and it incorporated to the sphere of influence to different ethnic groups that lived in different regions. This multiethnic character takes form of the stylistic and iconographic diversity of his archaeological materials. The monumental buildings of his administrative and religious centre are a witness of the economic and political force of the cardinal city and of his empire. Criterion (iii): The ruins of Tiwanaku bear striking witness to the power of the empire that played a leading role in the development of the Andean prehispanic civilization. Criterion (iv): The buildings of Tiwanaku are exceptional examples of the ceremonial and public architecture and art of one of the most important manifestations of the civilizations of the Andean region. Integrity All the attributes to convey the Outstanding Universal Value of the property are located within its boundaries. The archaeological remains have maintained to a certain extent their physical integrity although systematic conservation and maintenance measures will be required to ensure their physical stability and the protection against the adverse effect of climatic conditions in the long term. Similarly, effective enforcement of regulatory measures for the protection of the large areas of the ancient urban complex, that exist beneath the modern village of Tiwanaku and farmhouses, is crucial for maintaining the integrity of these remains. Authenticity As with most archaeological sites, Tiwanaku preserves a very high degree of authenticity. However, a conservation plan with precise guidelines for interventions, which take into consideration the original form and design, as well as the materials used for construction, will need to be implemented to ensure that the conditions of authenticity continue to be met. Protection and management requirements The Bolivian State has established regulations at the national, departmental and local government levels for the conservation, protection and safeguarding of the property. These include: The Political Constitution of the Bolivian State, Art. 191, Law 03/10/1906; D.S. 11/11/1909; Law 8/05/1927; D.L. 08/01/1945; D.S. Nº 05918-06/11/1961; R.M. Nº 1652-27/11/1961; D.S. 7234-30/06/1965; R.M. Nº 082/97-03/06/1997; D.S. Nº25263-30/12/1998. The departmental regulation: RAP Nº 0107-19/02/1999. Agreements between the Institutions of the Bolivian State and Tiwanaku's Municipality: Record of commitment for Tiwanaku 22/02/1999; Agreement of Interinstitutional cooperation between the Viceminister of Culture and Tiwanaku's Municipality 01/12/1998. Certification Municipal of protection to archaeological heritage Tiwanaku's 08/01/2000. The limits for the protection and safeguard of the property were established by means of the D.S. 25647-14/01/2000, where it is stipulated that the cultural heritage is of property of the State and divided it in three areas. The first two areas (Kalasasaya, with 23.5 ha and Pumapunku, with 7.0 ha) are physically protected, the third area (Mollukontu, with 41 ha) is going to be protected as part of the main plan of conservation. To guarantee the integrity and the authenticity of the areas declared property of the Bolivian State, there is delimited a protection zone that consists of a perimeter band, a 100 meters wide, surrounding the three archaeological areas before indicated as a single polygonal one. There is also a programme for the acquisition of other areas for of the Bolivian State. In addition, planning tools exist through the main plan of Tiwanaku (1999-2009) and a main plan of conservation. The main plan will entail the implementation of the following programmes: archaeological investigations, conservation and restoration, investigation in anthropology, infrastructure in general, dissemination and communication and administration of the site. This will also complement the main conservation plan that will address natural and human factors that affect the site Tiwanaku. Links Tiwanaku, a Photo Gallery Ancient Agriculture at Tiwanaku (Mesa Community College, Arizona) Tiwanaku (EMuseum, Minnesota State University) Museo Regional Arqueologico de Tiwanaku (spanish only) Activities 2 World Heritage Cities Programme LAC Extra-budgetary Projects News 2 World Heritage Centre expressed concern to the Minister of Cultures of Bolivia on Tiwanaku 22 March 2010 World Heritage Committee Inscribes 61 New Sites on World Heritage List 30 November 2000 Events 1 International Experts’ Meeting on Tiwanaku and the Akapana Pyramid 27 Aug 2012 - 29 Aug 2012 Media play_arrow Tiwanaku: Spiritual and Political Centre of the ... (UNESCO/NHK) Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Date of Inscription: 2000 Criteria: (iii)(iv) Property : 71.5 ha Dossier: 567rev Province of Ingavi, Department of La Paz S16 33 18.011 W68 40 23.801 Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation Disclaimer The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator . State of Conservation (SOC) by year 2025 2023 2021 2018 2016 2014 2013 2011 2010 2008 Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners Activities All our activities Volunteer Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert Policies Protection of human rights (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies Follow us Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS UNESCO Culture World Heritage Centre The List World Heritage List © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 top × You don't have your Password or Username Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. Search × Login Please enter your username Your password remember my profile Forgot your username or password? Become a member Previous Next Login 