URL https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/198/
 Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site - UNESCO World Heritage Centre World Heritage Convention Help preserve sites now ! Explore UNESCO English English Français Login Our expertise About World Heritage News Events The Convention Convention Text Basic Texts Operational Guidelines Policy Compendium Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage Governing Bodies The General Assembly The Committee Resolutions / Decisions Sessions since 1976 The States Parties The Advisory Bodies Funding World Heritage Fund Financial regulations International Assistance The Emblem Questions and answers The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who / Contacts Director of the World Heritage Centre Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Europe & North America Latin America and the Caribbean The List Global Strategy Criteria Upstream Process Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations World Heritage List New Inscribed Properties UNESCO Sites Navigator Interactive Map World Heritage in Danger The List in Danger Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2026-2030 Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring List of factors affecting the properties Success Stories Examples of the Convention at work Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve. Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures Browse case studies Featured Activities Indicators Culture|2030 World Heritage Cities Programme Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape Cultural Landscapes Capacity Building Category 2 Centres Natural World Heritage Climate Change and World Heritage World Heritage Marine Programme World Heritage and Biodiversity Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples World Heritage Education Programme World Heritage Volunteers Initiative World Heritage and Sustainable Development Sustainable Tourism Programme World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict. Our Partners Donate Partnerships Marketplace Our Partners Civil Society Donate Publications Publications Paper Series Urban Notebooks Brochures & Info kits Resource Manuals Other materials Newsletter Review Wall Map Documents Resources Search Glossary About this Website Terms / Policies Syndication Site Map Useful Websites Search search World Heritage Convention Explore UNESCO --> close Search search Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information. search tune Filter By Properties By States Parties By Regions Danger Site Delisted Transboundary / Transnational Year Inscribed Themes All Cities Cultural Landscape Forest Marine & coastal Earthen Architecture Criteria with only with Cultural Criteria: i ii iii iv v vi Natural Criteria: vii viii ix x Keywords Category Cultural Natural Mixed Media All With videos With photo gallery Display with the brief description Without With Display component parts Less component parts All Component parts Order by Country Region Year Name of the property Search The List Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site Print Share on social media Facebook Twitter UNESCO social media Facebook Youtube Twitter RSS World Heritage Terms / Policies Syndication Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site Description Maps Documents Gallery Video Indicators Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site Cahokia Mounds, some 13 km north-east of St Louis, Missouri, is the largest pre-Columbian settlement north of Mexico. It was occupied primarily during the Mississippian period (800–1400), when it covered nearly 1,600 ha and included some 120 mounds. It is a striking example of a complex chiefdom society, with many satellite mound centres and numerous outlying hamlets and villages. This agricultural society may have had a population of 10–20,000 at its peak between 1050 and 1150. Primary features at the site include Monks Mound, the largest prehistoric earthwork in the Americas, covering over 5 ha and standing 30 m high. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Site historique d'Etat des Cahokia Mounds Le site des Cahokia Mounds, à environ 13 km au nord de Saint Louis, Missouri, représente le plus grand foyer de peuplement précolombien au nord du Mexique. Il a été occupé essentiellement pendant le mississippien (800-1400), période où il couvrait 1 600 ha et comptait quelque 120 tumulus. C'est un remarquable exemple de société complexe fondée sur la chefferie et comprenant beaucoup de tumulus satellites et de nombreux hameaux et villages excentrés. Cette société agricole pourrait avoir atteint une population de 10 000 à 20 000 habitants à son apogée entre 1050 et 1150. Parmi les lieux essentiels du site, il faut noter Monks Mound, le plus grand ouvrage préhistorique en terre des Amériques, qui couvre plus de 5 ha et fait 3 m de haut. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 الموقع التاريخي لولاية الكاهوكيا ماوندز يمثل موقع كاهوكا ماونذر الواقع عند 31 كيلومتراً شمال سانت لويس، ميسوري أكبر مواطن السكن في الحقبة ما قبل الكولومبيّة شمال المكسيك. أصبح موطن سكن في خلال حقبة الميسيسيبي (800-1400) عندما كان يغطي 1600 هكتار ويضمّ حوالى120 حجراً. هو مثال استثنائي عن مجتمع معقّد تأسس على مبدأ المقاطعات ويضمّ العديد من الهضاب المجاورة والقرى البعيدة عن المركز. لعلّ عدد سكّان هذا المجتمع الزراعي بلغ 10000 إلى20000 بين عامي1050 و1150. ومن بين أبرز محطات الموقع حجارة مونكس ماوند وهي تحفة العصر الحجري الأعظم في الأراضي الأمريكيّة والتي تغطي أكثر من 5 هكتارات وتعلو على ارتفاع ثلاثة أمتار. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 卡俄基亚土丘历史遗址 卡俄基亚土丘历史遗址位于密苏里州圣路易斯城东北部约13公里处，这是哥伦布发现美洲前墨西哥以北地区最大的聚居地。该遗址主要在密西西比纪（公元800年至1400年）时期开始有人类居住，占地1600公顷，包括120个土丘。该遗址是古代部落社会的典型样例，以类似中心城和卫星城的模式进行规划，在中心城市周围有许多小村庄。这个农业社会在其鼎盛时期（约公元1050年至1150年间）约有人口1万至2万。在这个遗址上我们还可以找到一些远古建筑，例如当地的寺庙丘，这是美洲大陆上最大的史前土木工程，占地超过5公顷，高约30米。 source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Исторический памятник Курганы Кахокии Курганы Кахокии, находящиеся приблизительно в 13 км к северу-востоку от Сент-Луиса (штат Миссури), – это крупнейшее доколумбово поселение из всех, располагающихся севернее Мексики. Оно было обитаемо в основном в течение «периода Миссисипи» (800-1400 гг.), когда занимало порядка 1,6 тыс. га и включало около 120 курганов. Это яркий пример древнего племенного поселения, которое включает многочисленные связанные с ним курганы и окрестные небольшие поселки. Данное аграрное сообщество на пике своего развития в 1050-1150 гг. могло иметь население порядка 10-20 тыс. человек. Среди главных достопримечательностей – «Монашеский курган», крупнейшее доисторическое земляное сооружение в Америке, имеющее площадь 5 га и высоту 30 м. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Sitio histórico estatal de Cahokia Mounds Ubicado a unos 13 kilómetros al norte de San Luis (Misuri), el sitio de Cahokia Mounds es el mayor asentamiento humano precolombino encontrado al norte de México. Este lugar fue habitado en el Período Misisipiano (800-1400 d.C.), época en la que se extendía por unas 1.600 hectáreas y contaba con unos 120 túmulos. Los vestigios del sitio muestran la existencia de una sociedad compleja gobernada por caciques, así como la presencia de numerosos túmulos satélites y aldeas y pueblos periféricos. Esta sociedad agrícola llegó a tener probablemente unos 10.000 a 20.000 habitantes en el momento de su apogeo (1050-1150 d.C.). Otro elemento importante de este sitio es Monks Mound, el mayor túmulo prehistórico de las Américas, que tiene cinco hectáreas de superficie y treinta metros de altura. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 カホキア墳丘群州立史跡 source: NFUAJ Historische plaats Cahokia Mounds Cahokia Mounds - zo'n 13 kilometer ten noordoosten van Saint Louis, Missouri - is de grootste precolumbiaanse nederzetting ten noorden van Mexico. De plek werd voornamelijk bewoond tijdens de Mississippische periode (800-1400) toen het gebied bijna 1.600 hectare omvatte. Er waren toen ongeveer 120 artificiële aarden heuvels in het gebied. Cahokia Mounds is een voorbeeld van een complexe leiderschapscultuur met veel afgelegen gehuchten en dorpen. Op z'n piek (1050-1150) kende deze agrarische samenleving een bevolking van tussen de 10.000 tot 20.000 inwoners. Een belangrijke plek is de Monks Mound. Deze heuvel van meer dan 5 hectare groot en 30 meter hoog geldt als grootste prehistorische grondwerk op het Amerikaanse continent. Source: unesco.nl English French Arabic Chinese Russian Spanish Japanese Dutch add Outstanding Universal Value Brief synthesis Located in Collinsville, Illinois near the city of St. Louis, this largest pre-Columbian settlement north of Mexico is the pre-eminent example of a cultural, religious, and economic centre of the Mississippian culture (800–1350), which extended throughout the Mississippi Valley and the south-eastern United States. This agricultural society may have had a population of 10,000–20,000 at its peak between 1050 and 1150, which was equivalent to the population of many European cities at that time. It once covered more than 1,600 hectares and included some 120 mounds. Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site includes 51 platform, ridgetop, and conical mounds; residential, public, and specialized activity areas; and a section of reconstructed palisade, all of which together defined the limits and internal symmetry of the settlement. Dominating the community was Monks Mound, the largest prehistoric earthen structure in the New World. Constructed in fourteen stages, it covers six hectares and rises in four terraces to a height of 30 meters. The mounds served variously as construction foundations for public buildings and as funerary tumuli. There was also an astronomical observatory (“Woodhenge”), consisting of a circle of wooden posts. Extensive professional excavations have produced evidence of construction methods and the social activities of which the structures are further testimony. Criterion (iii): Dating from the Mississippian period (800–1350 at this site), Cahokia Mounds is the largest pre-Columbian archaeological site north of Mexico; it is also the earliest of the large Mississippian settlements. It is the pre-eminent example of a cultural, religious, and economic center of the prehistoric Mississippian cultural tradition. Criterion (iv): Cahokia graphically demonstrates the existence of a pre-urban society in which a powerful political and economic hierarchy was responsible for the organization of labor, communal agriculture, and trade. This is reflected in the size and layout of the settlement and the nature and structure of the public and private buildings. Integrity Within the boundaries of the property are located the main elements necessary to understand and express the Outstanding Universal Value of Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site, including the central mounds, the palisade, most of the “Woodhenge” and the functional areas. All three types of mounds are preserved, as well as borrow pits. The course of the palisade remains almost completely intact. Large areas adjacent to the core of the site have been acquired, reclaimed from development, and restored to preserve the historic setting. The property is thus of sufficient size to adequately ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s significance, and it does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. Although there is no official buffer zone, designation by the federal government of a larger area as a National Historic Landmark (1964), now containing additional State-owned property, provides equivalent protection. Authenticity Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site is authentic in terms of its forms and designs, materials and substance, and location and setting. Although some mounds have been damaged by past cultivation or development, many are merely truncated, and the mound bases remain. Contemporary structures, such as the interpretive centre, have been erected on concrete slabs so as not to disturb the underlying archaeological resources. A major highway and railroad traverse the site, but both are minimally visible. The highway is built in the Cahokia Creek floodplain where it does not greatly affect major subsurface archaeological features, and the railroad is built on an embankment. Known and potential threats to the property include erosion due to both natural and human causes, development, flooding (and flood control actions), and damage to subsurface archaeological features from deep-rooted plant species. Protection and management requirements The property is owned by the State of Illinois and designated by Illinois law as a State Historic Site specifically for its preservation and public interpretation. The core of the State Historic Site has been preserved as a protected public site since 1925. Its archaeological resources are further protected by State law and regulation. The Illinois Historic Preservation Agency, an agency of the State of Illinois, manages the entire property. The updated Master Management Plan (2008) addresses the protection, preservation, interpretation, restoration, and research of the State Historic Site and the State provides professional staff to manage and interpret it for the public. A staffed interpretive centre opened in 1989. The Master Management Plan and a monitoring program are part of a long-term strategy for the property to aid in addressing known and potential vulnerabilities such as erosion, development, flooding (and flood control), and damage to subsurface archaeological features from deep-rooted plant species. Links Google Arts & Culture: Story World Heritage in the United States Illinois Historic Preservation Agency Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site Activities 1 World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP) News 1 International Day for Monuments and Sites 2021 - Complex Pasts: Diverse Futures 16 April 2021 Media play_arrow Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site (UNESCO/NHK) United States of America Date of Inscription: 1982 Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2016 Criteria: (iii)(iv) Property : 541 ha Dossier: 198bis Collinsville, Illinois N38 39 31 W90 3 41 Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation Disclaimer The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners Activities All our activities Volunteer Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert Policies Protection of human rights (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies Follow us Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS UNESCO Culture World Heritage Centre The List World Heritage List © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 top × You don't have your Password or Username Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. Search × Login Please enter your username Your password remember my profile Forgot your username or password? Become a member Previous Next Login 