URL https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/4/
 L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site - UNESCO World Heritage Centre World Heritage Convention Help preserve sites now ! Explore UNESCO English English Français Login Our expertise About World Heritage News Events The Convention Convention Text Basic Texts Operational Guidelines Policy Compendium Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage Governing Bodies The General Assembly The Committee Resolutions / Decisions Sessions since 1976 The States Parties The Advisory Bodies Funding World Heritage Fund Financial regulations International Assistance The Emblem Questions and answers The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who / Contacts Director of the World Heritage Centre Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Europe & North America Latin America and the Caribbean The List Global Strategy Criteria Upstream Process Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations World Heritage List New Inscribed Properties UNESCO Sites Navigator Interactive Map World Heritage in Danger The List in Danger Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2026-2030 Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring List of factors affecting the properties Success Stories Examples of the Convention at work Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve. Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures Browse case studies Featured Activities Indicators Culture|2030 World Heritage Cities Programme Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape Cultural Landscapes Capacity Building Category 2 Centres Natural World Heritage Climate Change and World Heritage World Heritage Marine Programme World Heritage and Biodiversity Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples World Heritage Education Programme World Heritage Volunteers Initiative World Heritage and Sustainable Development Sustainable Tourism Programme World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict. Our Partners Donate Partnerships Marketplace Our Partners Civil Society Donate Publications Publications Paper Series Urban Notebooks Brochures & Info kits Resource Manuals Other materials Newsletter Review Wall Map Documents Resources Search Glossary About this Website Terms / Policies Syndication Site Map Useful Websites Search search World Heritage Convention Explore UNESCO --> close Search search Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information. search tune Filter By Properties By States Parties By Regions Danger Site Delisted Transboundary / Transnational Year Inscribed Themes All Cities Cultural Landscape Forest Marine & coastal Earthen Architecture Criteria with only with Cultural Criteria: i ii iii iv v vi Natural Criteria: vii viii ix x Keywords Category Cultural Natural Mixed Media All With videos With photo gallery Display with the brief description Without With Display component parts Less component parts All Component parts Order by Country Region Year Name of the property Search The List L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site Print Share on social media Facebook Twitter UNESCO social media Facebook Youtube Twitter RSS World Heritage Terms / Policies Syndication L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site Description Maps Documents Gallery Indicators L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site At the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula of the island of Newfoundland, the remains of an 11th-century Viking settlement are evidence of the first European presence in North America. The excavated remains of wood-framed peat-turf buildings are similar to those found in Norse Greenland and Iceland. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Lieu historique national de L’Anse aux Meadows À la pointe de la péninsule Great Northern de l'île de Terre-Neuve, les vestiges d'un établissement viking du XIe siècle confirment la première présence européenne en Amérique du Nord. Les vestiges mis au jour d'édifices en mottes de tourbe entre des charpentes de bois sont similaires à ceux trouvés au Groenland et en Islande. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 موقع لانس أو ميدوز الوطني التاريخي في رأس شبه جزيرة غريت نورثرن التابعة لجزيرة نيوفوندلاند، تدلّ الآثار المتبقية من مستوطنة للفيكينغ تعود إلى القرن الحادي عشر على أولّ وجود بشري أوروبي في أميركا الشمالية. وتشبه آثار هذه الأبنية المشيّدة من وحل التربة والمحفورة بين هياكل خشبية تلك المكتشفة في الغرونلاند وإيسلندا. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 拉安斯欧克斯梅多国家历史遗址 在纽芬兰岛北部半岛的一角，有11世纪维京人(Viking)的聚落遗址，这是欧洲人踏足北美大陆的最早证据。遗址出土的木结构泥草房屋遗迹同在格陵兰岛和冰岛发现的十分类似。 source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Национальный исторический парк Л’Анс-о-Медоус Остатки поселения викингов XI в. на оконечности Большого Северного полуострова острова Ньюфаундленд являются свидетельством первого появления европейцев в Северной Америке. Раскопанные остатки зданий из торфа с деревянным каркасом похожи на аналогичные, найденные в Северной Гренландии и в Исландии. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Sitio histórico nacional de l’Anse aux Meadows Situado en el extremo de la Gran Pení­nsula del Norte de la isla de Terranova, este parque alberga los vestigios de un asentamiento vikingo del siglo XI, que prueban una primera presencia de los europeos en el continente americano desde esa época. Las excavaciones han puesto al descubierto vestigios de edificios construidos con terrones de turba y armazones de madera, aní¡logos a los encontrados en Groenlandia e Islandia. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 ランス・オ・メドー国定史跡 source: NFUAJ Nationaal historisch gebied L’Anse aux Meadows L’Anse aux Meadows is een 11e-eeuwse Vikingnederzetting op het noordelijkste puntje van Newfoundland. Het is het bewijs van de eerste Europese menselijke aanwezigheid in Noord-Amerika. De opgegraven resten van met hout omlijste veenturfgebouwen zijn vergelijkbaar met de gebouwen die gevonden zijn bij de Noorse kolonie van Groenland en IJsland. Het vroegste teken van menselijke activiteit in dit gebied gaat ruwweg 5.000 jaar terug. L'Anse aux Meadows is de eerste en enige bekende nederzetting opgericht door Vikingen in Noord-Amerika en het vroegste bewijs van Europese nederzetting in de Nieuwe Wereld. Om deze reden is het een unieke mijlpaal in de geschiedenis van menselijke migratie en ontdekking. Source: unesco.nl English French Arabic Chinese Russian Spanish Japanese Dutch add Outstanding Universal Value Brief synthesis L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site contains the excavated remains of a complete 11th-century Viking settlement, the earliest evidence of Europeans in North America. Situated at the tip of the Great Northern Peninsula of the island of Newfoundland, this exceptional archaeological site consists of eight timber-framed turf structures built in the same style as those found in Norse Greenland and Iceland from the same period. The buildings include three dwellings, one forge and four workshops, on a narrow terrace overlooking a peat bog and small brook near the shore of Epaves Bay in the Straight of Belle Isle . Artifacts found at the site show evidence of activities including iron production and woodworking, likely used for ship repair, as well as indications that those who used the camp voyaged further south. The remnants correspond with the stories told in the Vinland Sagas, which document the voyages of Leif Erikson and other Norse explorers who ventured westward across the Atlantic Ocean from Iceland and Greenland to find and explore new territory, a significant achievement in the history of human migration and discovery. Criterion (vi): L’Anse aux Meadows is the first and only known site established by Vikings in North America and the earliest evidence of European settlement in the New World. As such, it is a unique milestone in the history of human migration and discovery. Integrity Measuring 7991 ha, L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is of sufficient size to ensure that the property is protected, remains intact, and takes in the full extent of the known Norse remains in the region. Its boundaries extend far beyond the areas that contain Norse archaeological remains, thus providing ample protection of the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s Outstanding Universal Value. L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is in stable condition. The archaeological site has been reburied in such a way as to protect the remnants from deterioration. There are no known or anticipated threats to the property, it is not at risk of degradation and does not suffer from adverse effects of development or neglect, the totality being managed as a National Historic Site by Parks Canada Agency. Authenticity L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site is authentic in location and setting, forms and designs, and materials and substances. Ample archival evidence shows the property to correspond with the journeys described in the Norse sagas. Extensive archaeological research after the site’s discovery in 1960 revealed that the timber-framed structures were constructed with a particular type of gabled roof and covered with turf taken from the surrounding peat bog. The layout of the rooms, fireplaces and openings followed the characteristics of Norse design. Excavation uncovered evidence of iron production at the site, as well as approximately 800 wooden, bronze, bone, and stone artefacts that confirm the Norse origins of the property and provide important information on the work and lifestyle of the site’s occupants. Protection and management requirements L’Anse aux Meadows was established as a National Historic Site in 1975 under a Federal-Provincial agreement between Canada and the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador. The property is legally protected under the Parks Canada Agency Act (1998) and the Canada National Parks Act (2000), and the site has a management plan in place, which is reviewed and renewed at regular intervals. The management plan requires that the resources directly related to the reasons for designation as a national historic site are not impaired or under threat; that the reasons for designation are effectively communicated to the public; and that heritage values, including Outstanding Universal Value, are respected in all decisions and actions affecting the property. The agreement that established L’Anse aux Meadows National Historic Site states that the Government of Canada and the Government of the Province of Newfoundland and Labrador shall consult together to ensure that the future development of the communities and areas adjacent to the property is planned jointly and is in keeping with their proximity to this internationally significant property. Parks Canada manages visitation and conservation at the site, and the artefact collection associated with the Viking base camp is stable and is displayed and/or stored under appropriate conditions. Special attention shall be given over the long term to monitoring for issues that could impact the state of conservation in the future and taking appropriate actions to protect the site. Links World Heritage in Canada (Parks Canada) L'Anse aux Meadows (Parks Canada) Activities 1 Youth Component, 32nd session of the World Heritage Committee (2008) Canada Date of Inscription: 1978 Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2017 Criteria: (vi) Property : 7,991 ha Dossier: 4bis Province of Newfoundland and Labrador N51 35 05 W55 33 0 Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation Disclaimer The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners Activities All our activities Volunteer Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert Policies Protection of human rights (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies Follow us Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS UNESCO Culture World Heritage Centre The List World Heritage List © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 top × You don't have your Password or Username Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. Search × Login Please enter your username Your password remember my profile Forgot your username or password? Become a member Previous Next Login 