URL https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/27/
 Mesa Verde National Park - UNESCO World Heritage Centre World Heritage Convention Help preserve sites now ! Explore UNESCO English English Français Login Our expertise About World Heritage News Events The Convention Convention Text Basic Texts Operational Guidelines Policy Compendium Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage Governing Bodies The General Assembly The Committee Resolutions / Decisions Sessions since 1976 The States Parties The Advisory Bodies Funding World Heritage Fund Financial regulations International Assistance The Emblem Questions and answers The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who / Contacts Director of the World Heritage Centre Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Europe & North America Latin America and the Caribbean The List Global Strategy Criteria Upstream Process Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations World Heritage List New Inscribed Properties UNESCO Sites Navigator Interactive Map World Heritage in Danger The List in Danger Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2026-2030 Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring List of factors affecting the properties Success Stories Examples of the Convention at work Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve. Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures Browse case studies Featured Activities Indicators Culture|2030 World Heritage Cities Programme Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape Cultural Landscapes Capacity Building Category 2 Centres Natural World Heritage Climate Change and World Heritage World Heritage Marine Programme World Heritage and Biodiversity Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples World Heritage Education Programme World Heritage Volunteers Initiative World Heritage and Sustainable Development Sustainable Tourism Programme World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict. Our Partners Donate Partnerships Marketplace Our Partners Civil Society Donate Publications Publications Paper Series Urban Notebooks Brochures & Info kits Resource Manuals Other materials Newsletter Review Wall Map Documents Resources Search Glossary About this Website Terms / Policies Syndication Site Map Useful Websites Search search World Heritage Convention Explore UNESCO --> close Search search Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information. search tune Filter By Properties By States Parties By Regions Danger Site Delisted Transboundary / Transnational Year Inscribed Themes All Cities Cultural Landscape Forest Marine & coastal Earthen Architecture Criteria with only with Cultural Criteria: i ii iii iv v vi Natural Criteria: vii viii ix x Keywords Category Cultural Natural Mixed Media All With videos With photo gallery Display with the brief description Without With Display component parts Less component parts All Component parts Order by Country Region Year Name of the property Search The List Mesa Verde National Park Print Share on social media Facebook Twitter UNESCO social media Facebook Youtube Twitter RSS World Heritage Terms / Policies Syndication Mesa Verde National Park Description Maps Documents Gallery Video Indicators Mesa Verde National Park A great concentration of ancestral Pueblo Indian dwellings, built from the 6th to the 12th century, can be found on the Mesa Verde plateau in south-west Colorado at an altitude of more than 2,600 m. Some 4,400 sites have been recorded, including villages built on the Mesa top. There are also imposing cliff dwellings, built of stone and comprising more than 100 rooms. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Parc national de Mesa Verde Dans l'extrême sud-ouest de l'État du Colorado, le plateau de Mesa Verde, qui atteint plus de 2 600 m d'altitude, abrite une énorme concentration d'habitats indiens ancestraux dans des « pueblos » construits du VI e au XII e siècle. Les quelque 4 400 sites recensés comprennent des villages bâtis au sommet de la Mesa et des habitations aménagées sur les falaises, construites en pierre et pouvant comporter plus de 100 pièces. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 منتزه ميسا فردي الوطني تقع هضبة ميسا فردي جنوب غرب ولاية كولورادو ويبلغ ارتفاعها2600 متر وتضم تجمّعاً كبيراً من مساكن الهنود الحمر القديمة المشيّدة بين القرنين السادس والثاني عشر. وتضمّ المواقع الأربعة آلاف وأربعماية التي جرى إحصاؤها قرىً مبنيّةً عند قمّة هضبة ميسا ومساكن مشيّدة عند نتوء صخريّة ومبنيّة من الحجارة يبلغ عددها أكثر من 100 قطعة. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 梅萨维德印第安遗址 在科罗拉多州西南部海拔2600多米的梅萨维德高原上发现了大量建于公元6世纪至12世纪的古代印第安人村落遗址。该遗址共有4400多处房屋，其中包括建在梅萨最高处的村落。当地还有许多壮观的悬崖村落，全都用石头砌成，共有超过100间房屋。 source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Древние индейские поселения на плато Меса-Верде На плато Меса-Верде, находящемся на юго-западе штата Колорадо, на высоте более 2600 м можно обнаружить большую концентрацию жилищ предков индейцев Пуэбло, относящихся к периоду VI-XII вв. Зарегистрировано около 4,4 тыс. объектов, включая поселения, построенные на вершине плато. Несколько внушительных жилых комплексов, располагаются под навесом скалистого обрыва, построено из камня и насчитывают более чем по 100 помещений. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Parque Nacional de Mesa Verde Situado al suroeste del Estado del Colorado, el altiplano de Mesa Verde alcanza más de 2.600 metros de altura. Este altiplano alberga una gran cantidad de viviendas de los indios pueblo construidas entre los siglos VI y XII. Se han localizado unos 4.400 sitios, entre los que figuran aldeas erigidas en lo alto de la meseta y viviendas de imponentes dimensiones construidas con piedra en farallones rocosos, que cuentan con más de cien habitaciones en algunos casos. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 メサ･ヴェルデ国立公園 コロラド州南西部にあるアメリカ先住民の遺跡。崖のくぼみに築かれた集合住宅で、約200の部屋が並ぶクリフ・パレスなど、各時代を反映するアメリカの先住民の生活の様子を今に伝えている。13世紀末の干ばつで住民は移住を余儀なくされ、廃墟になったといわれている。 source: NFUAJ Nationaal park Mesa Verde Het Mesa Verde-plateau is te vinden in het zuidwesten van Colorado op een hoogte van meer dan 2.600 meter. Op het plateau zijn een grote concentratie van voorouderlijke Pueblo-indianenwoningen te vinden, gebouwd van de 6e tot de 12e eeuw. In totaal horen er 4.400 locaties bij het nationale park, met inbegrip van dorpen die gebouwd zijn op de Mesa-top. Er bevinden zich ook imposante rotswoningen, gebouwd van steen, met meer dan 100 kamers. De dorpen van Mesa Verde werden in 1874 ontdekt en geplunderd door verzamelaars. De bescherming van het gebied is in 1906 in werking getreden. Source: unesco.nl English French Arabic Chinese Russian Spanish Japanese Dutch add Outstanding Universal Value Brief synthesis The Mesa Verde landscape is a remarkably well-preserved prehistoric settlement landscape of the Ancestral Puebloan culture, which lasted for almost nine hundred years from c . 450 to 1300. This plateau in southwest Colorado, which sits at an altitude of more than 2,600 meters, contains a great concentration of spectacular Pueblo Indian dwellings, including the well-known cliff dwellings. This rich landscape provides a remarkable archaeological laboratory for enhancing our understanding of the Ancestral Puebloan people. Some 600 cliff dwellings built of sandstone and mud mortar have been recorded within Mesa Verde National Park – including the famous multi-storey Cliff Palace, Balcony House, and Square Tower House – and an additional 4,300 archaeological sites have been discovered. The cliff dwelling sites range in size from small storage structures to large villages of 50 to 200 rooms. Many other archaeological sites, such as pit-house settlements and masonry-walled villages of varying size and complexity, are distributed over the mesas. Non-habitation sites include farming terraces and check dams, field houses, reservoirs and ditches, shrines and ceremonial features, as well as rock art. Mesa Verde represents a significant and living link between the Puebloan Peoples’ past and their present way of life. Criterion (iii): The exceptional archaeological sites of the Mesa Verde landscape provide eloquent testimony to the ancient cultural traditions of Native American tribes. They represent a graphic link between the past and present ways of life of the Puebloan Peoples of the American Southwest. Integrity Within the boundaries of the property are located all the elements necessary to understand and express the Outstanding Universal Value of Mesa Verde National Park, including habitation and non-habitation archaeological sites and features, as well as settlement patterns. Excavated sites have been stabilized and undergo routine monitoring, condition assessment, and preservation treatment, based on continuing research and consultation. The property is of sufficient size to adequately ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s significance, and does not suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. There is no buffer zone for the property. Authenticity Mesa Verde National Park is authentic in terms of its forms and designs, materials and substance, location and setting, and spirit. Large portions of the sandstone and mud-mortar multi-storey buildings have survived intact in form and materials, a tribute to the engineering skills of these early peoples as well as the dry environment of the mesa’s alcoves. These architectural remains reflect the range of ancient Pueblo construction techniques as well as settlement patterns. Extensive research on both the structures and many artefacts has provided a wealth of information about the lifestyles of the former occupants. Increased erosion following wildland fires poses a continuing threat to the property’s cultural values. However, management policies are in place to protect the resources to the greatest extent possible. The introduction of non-native invasive plant species has become a major problem. Furthermore, the potential exists for future development in the corridor along Highway 160, the northern boundary of the property. Protection and management requirements Mesa Verde National Park was established by an Act of Congress in 1906, before the existence of the National Park Service itself, and was the first archaeological area in the world to be recognized and protected in this way. The eventual inclusion of the area within the National Park system gives it the highest possible level of protection, as it is owned and maintained by the federal government, and assures a high standard of interpretation and public access. Park staff consults regularly on interpretive materials, research and preservation of archaeological resources, and proposed construction plans with representatives from 26 culturally affiliated and traditionally associated Native American tribes and pueblos who consider Mesa Verde their ancestral home. There is a General Management Plan for Mesa Verde National Park (1979). A long-term plan for the preservation of the 600 alcove sites was made possible through an Archaeological Site Conservation Program (1994). Ongoing efforts to enhance baseline information, condition assessments, and architectural documentation continue to inform both management decisions and interpretive materials. Carrying capacity and visitor impacts are carefully monitored, with policies in place to limit the impacts. Other plans on topics such as interpretation supplement the National Park’s General Management Plan. Sustaining the Outstanding Universal Value of the property over time will require protecting resources from erosion and other damage caused by wildland fires and other effects of climate change; managing invasive plant species that harm or may harm cultural resources; and ensuring that any development adjacent to the property does not have a negative impact on the property’s value, authenticity and integrity. Links Instagram - Mesa Verde National Park Facebook - Mesa Verde National Park Mesa Verde Foundation World Heritage in the United States Mesa Verde Museum Association Mesa Verde National Park (U.S. National Park Service) Activities 1 World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP) News 2 UNESCO and the Boston Museum of Science launch an exhibition on World Heritage 19 January 2024 "Passport" booklet highlighting United States’ World Heritage sites published 16 November 2012 Media play_arrow Mesa Verde National Park (UNESCO/NHK) United States of America Date of Inscription: 1978 Criteria: (iii) Property : 21,043 ha Dossier: 27 Colorado N37 15 42 W108 29 8 Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation Disclaimer The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners Activities All our activities Volunteer Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert Policies Protection of human rights (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies Follow us Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS UNESCO Culture World Heritage Centre The List World Heritage List © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 top × You don't have your Password or Username Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. Search × Login Please enter your username Your password remember my profile Forgot your username or password? Become a member Previous Next Login 