URL https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/353/
 Chaco Culture - UNESCO World Heritage Centre World Heritage Convention Help preserve sites now ! Explore UNESCO English English Français Login Our expertise About World Heritage News Events The Convention Convention Text Basic Texts Operational Guidelines Policy Compendium Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage Governing Bodies The General Assembly The Committee Resolutions / Decisions Sessions since 1976 The States Parties The Advisory Bodies Funding World Heritage Fund Financial regulations International Assistance The Emblem Questions and answers The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who / Contacts Director of the World Heritage Centre Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Europe & North America Latin America and the Caribbean The List Global Strategy Criteria Upstream Process Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations World Heritage List New Inscribed Properties UNESCO Sites Navigator Interactive Map World Heritage in Danger The List in Danger Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2026-2030 Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring List of factors affecting the properties Success Stories Examples of the Convention at work Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve. Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures Browse case studies Featured Activities Indicators Culture|2030 World Heritage Cities Programme Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape Cultural Landscapes Capacity Building Category 2 Centres Natural World Heritage Climate Change and World Heritage World Heritage Marine Programme World Heritage and Biodiversity Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples World Heritage Education Programme World Heritage Volunteers Initiative World Heritage and Sustainable Development Sustainable Tourism Programme World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict. Our Partners Donate Partnerships Marketplace Our Partners Civil Society Donate Publications Publications Paper Series Urban Notebooks Brochures & Info kits Resource Manuals Other materials Newsletter Review Wall Map Documents Resources Search Glossary About this Website Terms / Policies Syndication Site Map Useful Websites Search search World Heritage Convention Explore UNESCO --> close Search search Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information. search tune Filter By Properties By States Parties By Regions Danger Site Delisted Transboundary / Transnational Year Inscribed Themes All Cities Cultural Landscape Forest Marine & coastal Earthen Architecture Criteria with only with Cultural Criteria: i ii iii iv v vi Natural Criteria: vii viii ix x Keywords Category Cultural Natural Mixed Media All With videos With photo gallery Display with the brief description Without With Display component parts Less component parts All Component parts Order by Country Region Year Name of the property Search The List Chaco Culture Print Share on social media Facebook Twitter UNESCO social media Facebook Youtube Twitter RSS World Heritage Terms / Policies Syndication Chaco Culture Description Maps Documents Gallery Video Indicators Chaco Culture For over 2,000 years, Pueblo peoples occupied a vast region of the south-western United States. Chaco Canyon, a major centre of ancestral Pueblo culture between 850 and 1250, was a focus for ceremonials, trade and political activity for the prehistoric Four Corners area. Chaco is remarkable for its monumental public and ceremonial buildings and its distinctive architecture – it has an ancient urban ceremonial centre that is unlike anything constructed before or since. In addition to the Chaco Culture National Historical Park, the World Heritage property includes the Aztec Ruins National Monument and several smaller Chaco sites managed by the Bureau of Land Management. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 La culture chaco Pendant plus de 2 000 ans, les peuples pueblo ont occupé une vaste région au sud-ouest des États-Unis. Chaco Canyon, grand foyer de la culture ancestrale pueblo entre 850 et 1250, était un centre cérémoniel, commerçant et politique de la région préhistorique des Four Corners. Chaco est remarquable par ses bâtiments publics et cérémoniels monumentaux et son architecture caractéristique qui en font un ancien centre cérémoniel unique en son genre. Outre le parc national historique de la culture chaco, le bien du patrimoine mondial comprend le Monument national des ruines aztèques et plusieurs plus petits sites chaco gérés par le Bureau pour l'aménagement du territoire. Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 ثقافة شعوب شاكو على مدى أكثر من ألفي سنة، احتلّ الهنود الحمر منطقةً شاسعةً جنوب غرب الولايات المتحدة. وكان كانيون شاكو موئل ثقافة الهنود الحمر السالفة للفترة بين عامي 850 و1250 فكان مركزاً احتفالياً وتجارياً وسياسيّاً في منطقة الزوايا الأربع "فور كورنر" للعصر الحجري. وتتميّز شاكو بأبنيتها العامة والاحتفاليّة الأثريّة وبهندستها التي تجعل منها مركزاً احتفالياً فريداً من نوعه. إلى جانب المنتزه الوطني التاريخي لثقافة شاكو، يشتمل التراث العالمي على النصب الوطني لأطلال شعب الأزتيك إلى جانب مواقع أخرى أصغر حجماً يديرها مكتب إدارة الأراضي. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 查科文化国家历史公园 在长达两千多年的时间里，印第安人统治着现在美国西南部的大片土地。查科大峡谷曾是公元850年至1250年间古代原住民文化的中心，也是史前四角地区重要的宗教中心、贸易中心和政治中心。查科地区还以其独特的建筑而世界闻名，它不仅有许多古代公共建筑和宗教仪式建筑，而且还有一处古代城市仪式中心，这个建筑的风格可谓前无古人，后无来者。除了查科文化国家历史公园以外，世纪遗产还包括了其他几处由国家土地管理局管辖的阿兹特克遗迹国家古迹和较小的查科遗迹。 source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Национальный исторический парк Чако В течение более 2 тыс. лет племена индейцев пуэбло проживали в обширном регионе на юго-западе современных США. Каньон Чако, являвшийся в 850-1250 гг. главным очагом культуры предков этих индейцев, служил важным религиозным, торговым и политическим центром. Чако замечателен своими монументальными общественными и церемониальными зданиями с их четкой архитектурой. Он представляет собой древний городской церемониальный центр, отличный от всего, что было сооружено до и после него. В дополнение к национальному историческому парку Чако, объект всемирного наследия включает национальный памятник Руины Ацтеков и несколько более мелких памятников в районе Чако, находящихся в ведении Бюро землепользования. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 Cultura chaco Durante más de 2.000 años, los indios pueblo ocuparon una vasta región del sudoeste de Estados Unidos. El Cañón Chaco, núcleo principal de la cultura pueblo entre los años 850 y 1250, fue un centro ceremonial, comercial y político situado en la región prehistórica de Las Cuatro Esquinas. El sitio de Chaco destaca por sus monumentales edificios ceremoniales y públicos de singular arquitectura. Cuenta con un antiguo centro urbano ceremonial muy superior probablemente a todos cuantos hayan podido construirse antes o después. El sitio inscrito en la Lista del Patrimonio Mundial comprende, además del Parque Histórico Nacional de la Cultura Chaco, el Monumento Nacional Ruinas Aztecas y otros sitios más pequeños administrados la Oficina de Ordenación Territorial. source: UNESCO/CPE Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 チャコ文化 source: NFUAJ Chaco cultuur Meer dan 2000 jaar lang leefden er Pueblo-volkeren in een groot deel van het zuidwesten van de Verenigde Staten. Chaco Canyon was een belangrijke plaats binnen de voorouderlijke Pueblo cultuur tussen 850 en 1250 en vormde het centrum voor ceremonies, handel en politieke activiteiten in het prehistorische vierstatenpunt. Chaco is bijzonder vanwege zijn monumentale openbare en ceremoniële gebouwen en zijn karakteristieke architectuur. De stad heeft een oud-stedelijk ceremonieel centrum dat anders is dan alles wat er daarvoor of daarna gebouwd werd. Behalve het Nationaal park van de Chaco cultuur, behoren ook de ruïnes van de Azteken tot het werelderfgoed. Source: unesco.nl English French Arabic Chinese Russian Spanish Japanese Dutch add Outstanding Universal Value Brief synthesis Chaco Culture is a network of archaeological sites in northwestern New Mexico which preserves outstanding elements of a vast pre-Columbian cultural complex that dominated much of what is now the southwestern United States from the mid-9th to early 13th centuries. It includes Chaco Culture National Historical Park, the associated sites at Aztec Ruins National Monument, and five additional protected archaeological areas. The Chacoan society reached its height between about 1020 and 1110.These sites were a focus for ceremonies, trade, and political activity and they are remarkable for their monumental public and ceremonial buildings and distinctive multi-storey “great houses.” The sites were linked by an elaborate system of carefully engineered and constructed roads, many of which can still be traced. These achievements are particularly remarkable given the harsh environment of the region. The highly organized large-scale structures, featuring multi-storey construction and sophisticated coursed masonry, illustrate the increasing complexity of Chaco social structure, which distinguished itself within the regional culture of the ancestral Pueblo and dominated the area for more than four centuries. The high incidence of storage areas indicate the probability that the Chacoans played a central economic role, and the great size and unusual features of the ceremonial kivas suggest that complex religious ceremony may have been significant in their lives. Criterion (iii): The Chaco Canyon sites graphically illustrate the architectural and engineering achievements of the Chacoan people, who overcame the harshness of the environment of the southwestern United States to found a culture that dominated the area for more than four centuries. Integrity Within the boundaries of the property are located all the elements necessary to understand and express the Outstanding Universal Value of Chaco Culture, including walls built of sandstone and mud mortar standing more than five storeys tall, pine roof beams, and well-preserved archaeological remains that provide a comprehensive picture of the Chaco culture, all having survived due to high-quality craftsmanship and the dry, remote location. The property is of sufficient size to adequately ensure the complete representation of the features and processes that convey the property’s significance. Further evidence of the Chacoan system, including road traces and outlier communities with “great houses,” extends well beyond the property boundaries, but was not considered for inclusion at the time of inscription. There is no buffer zone. Since the property’s inscription, efforts such as partial site reburial, fencing, and patrolling have dramatically slowed the rate of deterioration. However, threats to its integrity from adjacent development (including associated utilities and roads), energy exploration, extraction, as well as transportation projects and proposals have increased. The property does not otherwise suffer from adverse effects of development and/or neglect. Authenticity Chaco Culture is authentic in terms of its forms and designs, materials and substance, and location and setting. The property’s good state of preservation means that many walls, tools, personal goods, datable material, and other objects of information remain in their original context. A careful policy of stabilization has ensured that the original fabric and design of the structures is preserved for continuing research and interpretation. Protection and management requirements The property is comprised of the acreage to which the federal government had surface title in 1987 located within seven components: Chaco Canyon, formerly a National Monument (1907) and now Chaco Culture National Historical Park (1980); Aztec Ruins, a National Monument (1923, expanded in 1928, 1930, 1948, 1988); and five Chaco Culture Archaeological Protection Sites (1980). The inclusion of Chaco Canyon and Aztec Ruins in the National Park system gives them the highest possible level of protection, and assures them a high standard of interpretation and public access. The legislation designating these components requires that the preservation of cultural resources be given high priority. Each Park unit has a General Management Plan and other related documents that address resource and land management and visitor use. The National Park Service’s general policies in these areas supplement the site-specific plans. The five Chaco Culture Archaeological Protection Sites are owned and managed for conservation by the Bureau of Land Management, a sister agency in the U.S. Department of the Interior. The property is subject to a suite of federal laws protecting archaeological properties. An Interagency Management Group established by federal law represents all federal, state, tribal, and local governments managing the property’s components. This group assures consistent and coordinated management through review of management decisions, sharing of technical expertise, and assistance with necessary legislation. A long-term goal for the property is to ensure that interventions that may occur within or adjacent to the property – including development, energy exploration, extraction, and transportation projects – do not have a negative impact on the property’s Outstanding Universal Value, authenticity and integrity. Links View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection World Heritage in the United States Aztec Ruins National Monument (U.S. National Park Service) Chaco Culture National Historical Park (U.S. National Park Service) Activities 1 World Heritage Earthen Architecture Programme (WHEAP) News 1 Aztec Ruins hosts World Heritage celebration 8 March 2012 Media play_arrow Chaco Culture (UNESCO/NHK) play_arrow Chaco Culture (UNESCO/NHK) United States of America Date of Inscription: 1987 Criteria: (iii) Property : 14,261 ha Dossier: 353rev Serial: yes Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation Disclaimer The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator . State of Conservation (SOC) by year 1992 Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners Activities All our activities Volunteer Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert Policies Protection of human rights (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies Follow us Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS UNESCO Culture World Heritage Centre The List World Heritage List © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 top × You don't have your Password or Username Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. Search × Login Please enter your username Your password remember my profile Forgot your username or password? Become a member Previous Next Login 