https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/1099/
Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape - UNESCO World Heritage Centre 
 Your browser does not support JavaScript. 
 World Heritage Convention 
 Help preserve sites now ! 
 Explore UNESCO 
 English 
 English
 Français 
 Login 
 Our expertise About World Heritage 
 News 
 Events 
 The Convention 
 Convention Text 
 Basic Texts 
 Operational Guidelines 
 Policy Compendium 
 Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage 
 Governing Bodies 
 The General Assembly 
 The Committee 
 Resolutions / Decisions 
 Sessions since 1976 
 The States Parties 
 The Advisory Bodies 
 Funding 
 World Heritage Fund 
 Financial regulations 
 International Assistance 
 The Emblem 
 Questions and answers 
 The Centre 
 Employment & Internships 
 Who's Who / Contacts 
 Director of the World Heritage Centre 
 Africa 
 Arab States 
 Asia & Pacific 
 Europe & North America 
 Latin America and the Caribbean 
 The List Global Strategy 
 Criteria 
 Upstream Process 
 Tentative Lists 
 World Heritage List Nominations 
 World Heritage List 
 New Inscribed Properties 
 UNESCO Sites Navigator 
 Interactive Map 
 World Heritage in Danger 
 The List in Danger 
 Reporting & Monitoring 
 State of Conservation 
 Periodic Reporting 
 Questionnaires 2026-2030 
 Questionnaires 2018-2024 
 Questionnaires 2008-2015 
 Reactive Monitoring 
 List of factors affecting the properties 
 Success Stories 
 Examples of the Convention at work 
 Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve.
 Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures 
 Browse case studies 
 Featured Activities 
 Indicators Culture|2030 
 World Heritage Cities Programme 
 Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape 
 Cultural Landscapes 
 Capacity Building 
 Category 2 Centres 
 Natural World Heritage 
 Climate Change and World Heritage 
 World Heritage Marine Programme 
 World Heritage and Biodiversity 
 Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment 
 Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties 
 World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples 
 World Heritage Education Programme 
 World Heritage Volunteers Initiative 
 World Heritage and Sustainable Development 
 Sustainable Tourism Programme 
 World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
 Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest 
 Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation
 Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict.
 Our Partners Donate 
 Partnerships 
 Marketplace 
 Our Partners 
 Civil Society 
 Donate 
 Publications Publications 
 Paper Series 
 Urban Notebooks 
 Brochures & Info kits 
 Resource Manuals 
 Other materials 
 Newsletter 
 Review 
 Wall Map 
 Documents 
 Resources 
 Search 
 Glossary 
 About this Website 
 Terms / Policies 
 Syndication 
 Site Map 
 Useful Websites 
 Search search 
 World Heritage Convention 
 Explore UNESCO --> 
 close 
 Search search 
 Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information.
 search 
 tune Filter 
 By Properties 
 By States Parties 
 By Regions 
 Danger Site 
 Delisted 
 Transboundary / Transnational 
 Year Inscribed 
 Themes 
 All 
 Cities 
 Cultural Landscape 
 Forest 
 Marine & coastal 
 Earthen Architecture 
 Criteria 
 with 
 only with 
 Cultural Criteria: 
 i 
 ii 
 iii 
 iv 
 v 
 vi 
 Natural Criteria: 
 vii 
 viii 
 ix 
 x 
 Keywords 
 Category 
 Cultural 
 Natural 
 Mixed 
 Media 
 All 
 With videos 
 With photo gallery 
 Display with the brief description 
 Without 
 With 
 Display component parts 
 Less component parts 
 All Component parts 
 Order by 
 Country 
 Region 
 Year 
 Name of the property 
 Search  
 The List 
 Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape 
 Print 
 Share on social media
 Facebook 
 Twitter 
 UNESCO social media
 Facebook 
 Youtube 
 Twitter 
 RSS World Heritage 
 Terms / Policies 
 Syndication 
 Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape
 Description 
 Maps 
 Documents 
 Gallery 
 Indicators 
 Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape
 Mapungubwe is set hard against the northern border of South Africa, joining Zimbabwe and Botswana. It is an open, expansive savannah landscape at the confluence of the Limpopo and Shashe rivers. Mapungubwe developed into the largest kingdom in the sub-continent before it was abandoned in the 14th century. What survives are the almost untouched remains of the palace sites and also the entire settlement area dependent upon them, as well as two earlier capital sites, the whole presenting an unrivalled picture of the development of social and political structures over some 400 years.
 Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 Paysage culturel de Mapungubwe
 Mapungubwe est adossé à la frontière nord qui sépare l’Afrique du Sud du Zimbabwe et du Botswana. C’est un vaste paysage de savane parsemé d’arbres, de quelques épineux, de baobabs colossaux, autour de terrasses de grès s’élevant au-dessus de la plaine. Au confluent du Limpopo et de la Shashe et enjambant les routes nord/sud et est/ouest dans le sud de Afrique, Mapungubwe fut le plus grand royaume du sous-continent avant son abandon au XIVe siècle. Il en survit des vestiges quasi intacts des sites des palais, avec toute la zone de peuplement qui en dépend, et deux capitales antérieures. L’ensemble offre un panorama inégalé du développement de structures sociales et politiques sur quelque 400 ans.
 Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 منظر مابونغوبوي الثقافي
 تقع مابونغوبوي عند الحدود الشمالية التي تفصل بين جنوب إفريقيا والزيمبابوي وبوتسوانا. إنها مساحة كبيرة من السافانا تنتشر فيها الأشجار والنبات الشوكي وأشجار الباوباب العملاقة من حول مسطّحات الصلصال الرملي التي ترتفع فوق السهل. وعند ملتقى نهري الليمبوبو والشاش الذي يتجاوز طرقات الشمال/ الجنوب والغرب/الشرق في جنوب أفريقيا، كانت مابونغوبوي أكبر مملكة في شبه القارة قبل هجرها في القرن السادس عشر. وقد بقي منها بعض آثار مواقع القصور التي لا تزال بحالة ممتازة، تضاف إليها المناطق السكنية التابعة لها وعاصمتان سابقتان. يشكّل المجموع منظراً عاماً لا مثيل له من تطوّر الهيكليّات الاجتماعية والسياسية على مدى حوالى 400 عام.
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 马蓬古布韦文化景观
 马蓬古布韦坐落于南非的北部边境，连结着津巴布韦与博茨瓦纳。它是位于林波波河和沙舍河汇流处的一处开放广阔的热带大草原风光。14世纪后它被人遗忘，在此之前它是非洲次大陆最大的王国。现在幸存的是几乎完整无损的宫殿遗址和依此而建的居留地以及两处早期的首都遗址。而这一切都为我们提供了约400年中那里的社会与政治结构发展的一幅无与伦比的图画。
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 Культурный ландшафт Мапунгубве 
 Мапунгубве располагается на крайнем севере ЮАР на границе с Зимбабве и Ботсваной. Ландшафт представлен открытыми обширными саваннами у слияния рек Лимпопо и Шаше. Мапунгубве превратилось в крупнейшее на юге континента королевство, существовавшее вплоть до XIV в. Здесь сохранились в почти неизменном виде остатки дворцов и всей связанной с ними жилой зоны, также можно увидеть руины двух более ранних столиц. В целом это дает представление о социальном и политическом развитии данного района в течение более чем 400 лет.
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 Paisaje cultural de Mapungubwe
 Este sitio se halla en el confín septentrional de Sudáfrica, en la zona fronteriza con Zimbabwe y Botswana. Es un vasto paisaje de sabana jalonado de árboles, especies vegetales espinosas y baobabs colosales, con terrazas de arenisca que se alzan en medio de la llanura. Situada en la confluencia de los ríos Limpopo y Shashe, en una encrucijada de las rutas norte-sur y este-oeste del África Meridional, Mapungubwe fue la capital del reino más importante del subcontinente austral africano, antes de que fuese abandonada en el siglo XIV. Actualmente subsisten vestigios casi intactos de los emplazamientos de sus palacios y de las zonas pobladas, así como restos de otras dos capitales anteriores. El conjunto ofrece una panorámica excepcional de la evolución de las estructuras sociales y políticas a lo largo de unos cuatro siglos.
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 マプングブエの文化的景観　
 南アフリカにあるマプングブエは、ジンバブエとボツワナとの国境沿いに位置し、リンポポ川とシャシェ川の合流点で栄えた。南方アフリカの四方に通じる交易ルートの中心となり、14世紀に放棄されるまでは、アラビア・インド・中国とのインド洋交易で、アフリカ大陸最強の王国として発展した。ほとんど手つかずで残る宮殿遺跡や全集落、2つの古代首都が現存し、13世紀を最盛期とした比類のない400年におよぶ社会的・政治的構造を見ることができる。
 source: NFUAJ 
 Cultuurlandschap Mapungubwe
 Mapungubwe ligt tegen de noordelijke grens aan van Zuid-Afrika, tegen Zimbabwe en Botswana. Het is een open, uitgestrekt savannelandschap dat bij de samenvloeiing van de Limpopo en Shashe rivieren ligt. Mapungubwe groeide uit tot het grootste koninkrijk in het subcontinent, voordat het in de 14e eeuw verlaten werd. Overgebleven zijn de bijna onaangetaste overblijfselen van paleizen en van hen afhankelijke nederzettingsgebieden, maar ook twee vroegere hoofdsteden. Het geheel geeft een ongeëvenaard beeld van de ontwikkeling van de sociale en politieke structuren gedurende meer dan 400 jaar.
 Source: unesco.nl 
 English 
 French 
 Arabic 
 Chinese 
 Russian 
 Spanish 
 Japanese 
 Dutch 
 add 
 Outstanding Universal Value
 Brief synthesis 
 The Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape demonstrates the rise and fall of the first indigenous kingdom in Southern Africa between 900 and 1,300 AD. The core area covers nearly 30,000 ha and is supported by a suggested buffer zone of around 100,000 ha. Within the collectively known Zhizo sites are the remains of three capitals - Schroda; Leopard’s Kopje; and the final one located around Mapungubwe hill - and their satellite settlements and lands around the confluence of the Limpopo and the Shashe rivers whose fertility supported a large population within the kingdom.
 Mapungubwe's position at the crossing of the north/south and east/west routes in southern Africa also enabled it to control trade, through the East African ports to India and China, and throughout southern Africa. From its hinterland it harvested gold and ivory - commodities in scarce supply elsewhere – and this brought it great wealth as displayed through imports such as Chinese porcelain and Persian glass beads.
 This international trade also created a society that was closely linked to ideological adjustments, and changes in architecture and settlement planning. Until its demise at the end of the 13th century AD, Mapungubwe was the most important inland settlement in the African subcontinent and the cultural landscape contains a wealth of information in archaeological sites that records its development. The evidence reveals how trade increased and developed in a pattern influenced by an elite class with a sacred leadership where the king was secluded from the commoners located in the surrounding settlements.
 Mapungubwe's demise was brought about by climatic change. During its final two millennia, periods of warmer and wetter conditions suitable for agriculture in the Limpopo/Shashe valley were interspersed with cooler and drier pulses. When rainfall decreased after 1300 AD, the land could no longer sustain a high population using traditional farming methods, and the inhabitants were obliged to disperse. Mapungubwe's position as a power base shifted north to Great Zimbabwe and, later, Khami.
 The remains of this famous kingdom, when viewed against the present day fauna and flora, and the geo-morphological formations of the Limpopo/Shashe confluence, create an impressive cultural landscape of universal significance.
 Criterion (ii): The Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape contains evidence for an important interchange of human values that led to far-reaching cultural and social changes in Southern Africa between AD 900 and 1300.
 Criterion (iii): The remains in the Mapungubwe Cultural Landscape are a remarkably complete testimony to the growth and subsequent decline of the Mapungubwe State which at its height was the largest kingdom in the African subcontinent.
 Criterion (iv): The establishment of Mapungubwe as a powerful state trading through the East African ports with Arabia and India was a significant stage in the history of the African sub-continent. 
 Criterion (v): The remains in the Mapungubwe cultural landscape graphically illustrate the impact of climate change and record the growth and then decline of the Kingdom of Mapungubwe as a clear record of a culture that became vulnerable to irreversible change.
 Integrity 
 All remains of the main settlements are in the nominated property, as are all major phases of the Mapungubwe kingdoms’ development and decline. The property contains substantial areas of virtually untouched cultural landscape of very high quality but, pending their decommissioning, these are separated by some areas of modern citrus plantations and circular irrigated agricultural fields in private ownership.
 The considerable agricultural enterprise of the final phase at Mapungubwe has vanished. Although much of the core landscape has returned to its unimproved state with wild grazing game animals, the recent opening up of the property to big game, especially elephants needs to be considered, and is being monitored.
 The Messina area is a rich mining area and the diamond mining operations at Riedel (small scale) and Venetia (major operation) could have a potential impact on the property. There is also a possibility that deposits of other valuable minerals may yet be found. With mining rights being recently returned to the State, better future control was anticipated but the granting of a mining licence for coal 5 km from the boundary of the property, in a highly sensitive area adjacent to the Limpopo river and in the proposed buffer zone that was submitted at the time of the inscription, is a considerable threat.
 The integrity of the site has been affected by the standard of the excavations in the 1930s which it could be argued led to valuable evidence being lost – and thus the completeness of the site, in both physical and intellectual terms has been compromised.
 Authenticity 
 The nominated property and buffer zone have largely not been subjected to any destructive form of human intervention since the remains were abandoned, and the current agricultural activities have not had a major impact on the cultural landscape in terms of its ability to convey its value. However there is a need to ensure that old excavations are not eroded by climatic forces or by uncontrolled visitors.
 Protection and management requirements 
 The Mapungubwe site and the buffer zone are legally protected through the National Heritage Resources Act (No 25 of 1999), the World Heritage Convention Act (No 43 of 1999) and the National Environmental Management Act (No 73 of 1989).
 The property is also recognized as a protected area in terms of the National Environmental Management Protected Areas, 2003 (Act 57 of 2003). This legislation implies that mining or prospecting will be completely prohibited from taking placing within the property and the buffer zone. Furthermore, any development with a potential impact on the property will be subjected to an environmental impact assessment. 
 SANParks is the management authority for the property and provides overall management involving coordinating government and local community efforts to conserve the site. SANParks is currently updating the Integrated Management Plan. Regular consultative meetings with stakeholders and local communities take place on the site through the park forum and by other means of engagement.
 A Trilateral Memorandum of Understanding is also being drawn up with the objective of establishing the Limpopo-Shashe Transfrontier Conservation Area (TFCA). This very extensive area of 5,040 km² will, when established, constitute an effective buffer zone. It is intended that each participating country will concentrate on one facet of protection: cultural heritage in South Africa; wildlife in Botswana; and living cultures in Zimbabwe.
 To help guarantee long-term protection for the property there is a need to complete the Integrated Management Plan and to submit the buffer zone for approval by the World Heritage Committee.
 There is also a need to ensure that any consideration of mining licenses is in line with the recommendations of the Technical Workshop on World Heritage and Mining adopted at the 24th session of the World Heritage Committee, to ensure that mining does not constitute a threat to the property, its buffer zone or its wider setting.
 Links 
 View photos from OUR PLACE the World Heritage collection 
 Vhembe-Dongola National Park (SANParks) 
 Mapungubwe Museum (University of Pretoria) 
 Mapungubwe: Home of the Golden Rhinoceros (University of Pretoria) 
 Activities 1 
 Cultural Landscapes 
 South Africa 
 Date of Inscription: 2003 
 Minor boundary modification inscribed year: 2014 
 Criteria: (ii)(iii)(iv)(v) 
 Property : 
 28,168.6602 ha
 Buffer zone: 
 104,800 ha 
 Dossier: 1099bis 
 Northern Province 
 S22 11 33 E29 14 20.004 
 Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation 
 Disclaimer
 The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. 
 The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. 
 State of Conservation (SOC)
 by year
 2018 
 2016 
 2013 
 2012 
 2011 
 2010 
 Protections 
by other conservation instruments
 1 protection / 1 element
 Biosphere Reserves (1 element) 
 Vhembe 
 Read more about synergies 
 Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) 
 General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) 
 About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who 
 The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations 
 Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America 
 Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners 
 Activities All our activities Volunteer 
 Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... 
 Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance 
 More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! 
 UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters 
 Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert 
 Policies Protection of human rights 
 (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies 
 Follow us
 Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS 
 UNESCO 
 Culture 
 World Heritage Centre 
 The List 
 World Heritage List 
 © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 
 top 
 × 
 You don't have your Password or Username 
 Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. 
 Search 
 × 
 Login
 Please enter your username 
 Your password 
 remember my profile 
 Forgot your username or password? 
 Become a member 
 Previous  
 Next  
 Login