https://whc.unesco.org/en/list/364/
Great Zimbabwe National Monument - UNESCO World Heritage Centre 
 Your browser does not support JavaScript. 
 World Heritage Convention 
 Help preserve sites now ! 
 Explore UNESCO 
 English 
 English
 Français 
 Login 
 Our expertise About World Heritage 
 News 
 Events 
 The Convention 
 Convention Text 
 Basic Texts 
 Operational Guidelines 
 Policy Compendium 
 Declaration of principles to promote international solidarity and cooperation to preserve World Heritage 
 Governing Bodies 
 The General Assembly 
 The Committee 
 Resolutions / Decisions 
 Sessions since 1976 
 The States Parties 
 The Advisory Bodies 
 Funding 
 World Heritage Fund 
 Financial regulations 
 International Assistance 
 The Emblem 
 Questions and answers 
 The Centre 
 Employment & Internships 
 Who's Who / Contacts 
 Director of the World Heritage Centre 
 Africa 
 Arab States 
 Asia & Pacific 
 Europe & North America 
 Latin America and the Caribbean 
 The List Global Strategy 
 Criteria 
 Upstream Process 
 Tentative Lists 
 World Heritage List Nominations 
 World Heritage List 
 New Inscribed Properties 
 UNESCO Sites Navigator 
 Interactive Map 
 World Heritage in Danger 
 The List in Danger 
 Reporting & Monitoring 
 State of Conservation 
 Periodic Reporting 
 Questionnaires 2026-2030 
 Questionnaires 2018-2024 
 Questionnaires 2008-2015 
 Reactive Monitoring 
 List of factors affecting the properties 
 Success Stories 
 Examples of the Convention at work 
 Activities Activites The World Heritage Centre is at the forefront of the international community’s efforts to protect and preserve.
 Browse all activities World Heritage Canopy Heritage Solutions for Sustainable Futures 
 Browse case studies 
 Featured Activities 
 Indicators Culture|2030 
 World Heritage Cities Programme 
 Recommendation on the Historic Urban Landscape 
 Cultural Landscapes 
 Capacity Building 
 Category 2 Centres 
 Natural World Heritage 
 Climate Change and World Heritage 
 World Heritage Marine Programme 
 World Heritage and Biodiversity 
 Corporate sector and the World Heritage ‘no-go’ commitment 
 Reducing Disasters Risks at World Heritage Properties 
 World Heritage and Indigenous Peoples 
 World Heritage Education Programme 
 World Heritage Volunteers Initiative 
 World Heritage and Sustainable Development 
 Sustainable Tourism Programme 
 World Heritage Programme for Small Island Developing States (SIDS) 
 Initiative on Heritage of Religious Interest 
 Partnerships World Heritage partnerships for conservation
 Ensuring that World Heritage sites sustain their outstanding universal value is an increasingly challenging mission in today’s complex world, where sites are vulnerable to the effects of uncontrolled urban development, unsustainable tourism practices, neglect, natural calamities, pollution, political instability, and conflict.
 Our Partners Donate 
 Partnerships 
 Marketplace 
 Our Partners 
 Civil Society 
 Donate 
 Publications Publications 
 Paper Series 
 Urban Notebooks 
 Brochures & Info kits 
 Resource Manuals 
 Other materials 
 Newsletter 
 Review 
 Wall Map 
 Documents 
 Resources 
 Search 
 Glossary 
 About this Website 
 Terms / Policies 
 Syndication 
 Site Map 
 Useful Websites 
 Search search 
 World Heritage Convention 
 Explore UNESCO --> 
 close 
 Search search 
 Take advantage of the search to browse through the World Heritage Centre information.
 search 
 tune Filter 
 By Properties 
 By States Parties 
 By Regions 
 Danger Site 
 Delisted 
 Transboundary / Transnational 
 Year Inscribed 
 Themes 
 All 
 Cities 
 Cultural Landscape 
 Forest 
 Marine & coastal 
 Earthen Architecture 
 Criteria 
 with 
 only with 
 Cultural Criteria: 
 i 
 ii 
 iii 
 iv 
 v 
 vi 
 Natural Criteria: 
 vii 
 viii 
 ix 
 x 
 Keywords 
 Category 
 Cultural 
 Natural 
 Mixed 
 Media 
 All 
 With videos 
 With photo gallery 
 Display with the brief description 
 Without 
 With 
 Display component parts 
 Less component parts 
 All Component parts 
 Order by 
 Country 
 Region 
 Year 
 Name of the property 
 Search  
 The List 
 Great Zimbabwe National Monument 
 Print 
 Share on social media
 Facebook 
 Twitter 
 UNESCO social media
 Facebook 
 Youtube 
 Twitter 
 RSS World Heritage 
 Terms / Policies 
 Syndication 
 Great Zimbabwe National Monument
 Description 
 Maps 
 Documents 
 Gallery 
 Video 
 Indicators 
 Assistance 
 Great Zimbabwe National Monument
 The ruins of Great Zimbabwe – the capital of the Queen of Sheba, according to an age-old legend – are a unique testimony to the Bantu civilization of the Shona between the 11th and 15th centuries. The city, which covers an area of nearly 80 ha, was an important trading centre and was renowned from the Middle Ages onwards.
 Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 Monument national du Grand Zimbabwe
 Les ruines du Grand Zimbabwe, qui, selon une légende séculaire, aurait été la capitale de la reine de Saba, sont un témoignage unique de la civilisation bantoue des Shona entre le XI e et le XV e siècle. La ville, d'une superficie de près de 80 ha fut un centre d'échanges important, renommé dès le Moyen Âge.
 Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 نصب زيمبابوي الكبرى الوطني
 تشكل انقاض زيمبابوي الكبرى التي كانت بحسب إحدى الأساطير العلمانية عاصمة ملكة سبأ شاهداً فريداً على حضارة البانتو الخاصة بقبائل شونا بين القرنين الحادي عشر والخامس عشر. وأصبحت المدينة الممتدة على مساحة تقارب 80 هكتاراً مركزاً هاماً للتبادل ذاعت شهرته منذ القرون الوسطى.
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 大津巴布韦国家纪念地
 据一个古老的传说，大津巴布韦遗址是希巴皇后的首府，同时还是11世纪到15世纪期间绍纳城班图文明唯一的见证。这座城市面积将近80公顷，曾经是一个重要的贸易中心，自中世纪以来闻名于世。
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 Национальный памятник Великий Зимбабве 
 Руины Великого Зимбабве, который, согласно древней легенде, был столицей царицы Савской, являются уникальными свидетельствами существования бантуязычной народности шона в период ХI-ХV вв. Этот город площадью около 80 га являлся важнейшим центром торговли и пользовался известностью с начала Средних веков.
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 Monumento nacional del Gran Zimbabwe
 Las ruinas del Gran Zimbabwe –capital de la reina de Saba, según una vieja leyenda– son un testimonio excepcional de lo que fue la civilización bantú de los shona entre los siglos XI y XV. La ciudad, que abarcaba una superficie de unas 80 hectáreas, fue un importante centro de intercambios comerciales, muy conocido desde la Edad Media.
 source: UNESCO/CPE 
Description is available under license CC-BY-SA IGO 3.0 
 大ジンバブエ国立記念物
 ジンバブエ南部、11～15世紀にかけて栄えた東アフリカ文化を伝える巨大な石造建築遺跡。丘の上の「アクロポリス」と、「谷の遺跡」と呼ばれる住居跡、低地に外壁をめぐらせた「神殿」の三つの遺跡に分かれている。「アクロポリス」は巨大な自然石を利用した石壁がつくられ、「神殿」には長径100m、短径80mの楕円形の建物である。
 source: NFUAJ 
 Nationaal monument Groot Zimbabwe
 Het Nationaal monument Groot Zimbabwe ligt op 30 km van Masvingo (voorheen Fort Victoria). Het gebied strekt zich uit over bijna 800 hectare en is verdeeld in de Hill ruins (heuvelruïnes), Great Enclosure (grote omheining) en de Valley ruins (valleiruïnes). De indrukwekkende ruïnes getuigen op een unieke manier van de Bantoebeschaving van de Shona zoals die was tussen de 11e en 15e eeuw. Volgens een eeuwenoude legende is Groot-Zimbabwe de hoofdstad van de koningin van Sheba. De stad - met een oppervlakte van bijna 80 hectare - was een belangrijk handelscentrum en gerenommeerd sinds de Middeleeuwen en daarna.
 Source: unesco.nl 
 English 
 French 
 Arabic 
 Chinese 
 Russian 
 Spanish 
 Japanese 
 Dutch 
 add 
 Outstanding Universal Value
 Brief synthesis 
 Great Zimbabwe National Monument is approximately 30 km from Masvingo and located in the lowveld at an altitude of some 1100 m in a sparsely populated region of the Bantu/Shona people. The property, built between 1100 and 1450 AD, extends over almost 800 ha and is divided into three groups: the Hill Ruins, the Great Enclosure and the Valley Ruins.
 The Hill Ruins, forming a huge granite mass atop a spur facing north-east/south-west, were continuously inhabited from the 11th to 15th centuries, and there are numerous layers of traces of human settlements. Rough granite rubble-stone blocks form distinct enclosures, accessed by narrow, partly covered, passageways. This acropolis is generally considered a 'royal city'; the west enclosure is thought to have been the residence of successive chiefs and the east enclosure, where six steatite upright posts topped with birds were found, considered to serve a ritual purpose.
 The Great Enclosure, which has the form of an ellipsis, is located to the south of the hills and dates to the 14th century. It was built of cut granite blocks, laid in regular courses, and contains a series of daga-hut living quarters, a community area, and a narrow passage leading to a high conical tower. The bricks (daga) were made from a mixture of granitic sand and clay. Huts were built within the stone enclosure walls; inside each community area other walls mark off each family's area, generally comprising a kitchen, two living huts and a court.
 The Valley Ruins are a series of living ensembles scattered throughout the valley which date to the 19th century. Each ensemble has similar characteristics: many constructions are in brick (huts, indoor flooring and benches, holders for recipients, basins, etc.) and dry stone masonry walls provide insulation for each ensemble. Resembling later developments of the Stone Age, the building work was carried out to a high standard of craftsmanship, incorporating an impressive display of chevron and chequered wall decorations.
 Scientific research has proved that Great Zimbabwe was founded in the 11th century on a site which had been sparsely inhabited in the prehistoric period, by a Bantu population of the Iron Age, the Shona. In the 14th century, it was the principal city of a major state extending over the gold-rich plateaux; its population exceeded 10,000 inhabitants. About 1450, the capital was abandoned because the hinterland could no longer furnish food for the overpopulated city and because of deforestation. The resulting migration benefited Khami, which became the most influential city in the region, but signaled waning political power. When in 1505 the Portuguese settled in Sofala, the region was divided between the rival powers of the kingdoms of Torwa and Mwene-Mutapa.
 Archaeological excavations have revealed glass beads and porcelain from China and Persia, and gold and Arab coins from Kilwa which testify to the extent of long-standing trade with the outer world. Other evidence, including potsherds and ironware, gives a further insight to the property’s socio-economic complexity and about farming and pastoral activities. A monumental granite cross, located at a traditionally revered and sacred spiritual site, also illustrates community contact with missionaries.
 Criterion (i): A unique artistic achievement, this great city has struck the imagination of African and European travellers since the Middle Ages, as evidenced by the persistent legends which attribute to it a Biblical origin.
 Criterion (iii): The ruins of Great Zimbabwe bear a unique testimony to the lost civilisation of the Shona between the 11th and 15th centuries.
 Criterion (vi): The entire Zimbabwe nation has identified with this historically symbolic ensemble and has adopted as its emblem the steatite bird, which may have been a royal totem.
 Integrity 
 The property, extending to almost 800 ha, is considered relatively intact and of an appropriate size to maintain the diverse cultural needs, functions and interactions of the traditional and urban communities in an ongoing process. The boundaries and buffer zone have been delineated and are of sufficient size to contain the natural and aesthetic attributes of the property. It is well protected from modern environmental pressures and alternative land uses by surrounding cultural and traditional barriers, and by the traditional communities themselves.
 The natural environment within and around the Great Zimbabwe Estate is important for the survival of the archaeological remains and the understanding of the relationship between the built environment and its setting. Measures need to be continued so that this important attribute continues to be protected. The natural fauna has to a large extent been eliminated by poaching and other means. Although the flora is not much different from the surrounding areas, it needs to be kept under control, particularly from the invasive lantana camara .
 Authenticity 
 The authenticity of the property is unquestionable, particularly the fossil localities which need to remain undisturbed. It is a non-functional sacred archaeological site that is still being used by contemporary communities for spiritual reasons.
 The method of construction is unique in African architecture and, although they are examples of similar work elsewhere, none are as distinguished and imposing as Great Zimbabwe. It is an edifice which emulates that of the prehistoric people and is unquestionably of Bantu origin. The Shona word Zimbabwe means the house in stone. The divine soapstone figurines, the Zimbabwe Birds, found within the ruins are testimony to the use of the site as place of worship spanning from the ancient past to the present day.
 Decay phenomena have occurred due to variations in temperature, soil moisture content, and tourism pressure, encroaching invasive vegetation and improper preservation methods. All of these factors need to be controlled through a sustained conservation and maintenance plan to maintain the conditions of authenticity. Particular attention needs to be put on the conservation techniques and materials employed as well as on the application of conservation standards that meet international requirements but are balanced with traditional uses at the property. Provisions should also be made to accommodate rituals and practices that substantiate the associative values of the property.
 Protection and management requirements 
 The site has been legally protected since 1893 and is currently protected under the National Museum & Monuments Act Chapter 25:11 (1976) which provides for the legal protection of the resources within the property.
 The National Museums and Monuments of Zimbabwe (NMMZ), under the Ministry of Home Affairs, is the entity directly responsible for the management of the property. Funding for the management and conservation of the property comes mainly from the central government with limited income generated by entrance fees, accommodation and sale of publications which are used to finance projects at the national level at the discretion of the NMMZ Board of Trustees.
 Although there are management arrangements for the property, an updated and integrated Management Plan is critical to ensure the long term conservation of the property and address existing factors mainly potential encroachments, impacts from unplanned or inappropriate tourism development and public use. Adequate financial resources need to be provided to ensure the sustained implementation of conservation, maintenance and monitoring activities and skilled staff needs to exist to mitigate the progressive deterioration of the historic fabric. The Management Plan should also emphasize the implementation of programmes to enhance community participation and promote the continuation of the religious functions of the site.
 Activities 1 
 Culture|2030 Indicators National Profile of Zimbabwe 
 News 2 
 Videos: Site managers report on Covid-19 
 26 October 2020 
 Academics mobilized for the safeguarding of African World Heritage 
 3 May 2018 
 Events 3 
 Academics mobilized for the safeguarding of African World Heritage 
 26 Apr 2018 - 28 Apr 2018 
 OPEN CALL, extended deadline 21 March: Workshop World Heritage & Educational Institutions in Africa 
 8 Mar 2018 - 21 Mar 2018 
 Call for applications for World Heritage Risk Preparedness workshop, 6 -18 May 2013 
 20 Mar 2013 - 2 Apr 2013 
 Media
 play_arrow Great Zimbabwe National Monument (UNESCO/NHK) 
 play_arrow Great Zimbabwe National Monument (UNESCO/NHK) 
 Zimbabwe 
 Date of Inscription: 1986 
 Criteria: (i)(iii)(vi) 
 Property : 
 722 ha
 Dossier: 364 
 S20 16 16.212 E30 55 59.768 
 Web Browser not supported for ESRI ArcGIS API version 4.10. WebGL must be enable, see documentation 
 Disclaimer
 The Nomination files produced by the States Parties are published by the World Heritage Centre at its website and/or in working documents in order to ensure transparency, access to information and to facilitate the preparations of comparative analysis by other nominating States Parties. 
 The sole responsibility for the content of each Nomination file lies with the State Party concerned. The publication of the Nomination file, including the maps and names, does not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever of the World Heritage Committee or of the Secretariat of UNESCO concerning the history or legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its boundaries. 
 The georeferenced polygons for this property will be made available once the GIS data will be received by UNESCO. To experience the potential of GIS data, please visit the UNESCO Sites Navigator . 
 State of Conservation (SOC)
 by year
 1996 
 Committee sessions Statutory Documents Committee decisions 48 th session (2026) 47 th session (2025) 
 General Assembly 26 th GA (2027) 25 th GA (2025) 
 About World Heritage The Convention Convention Text Policy Compendium Declaration of principles Operational Guidelines The Emblem The States Parties The Advisory Bodies The Centre Employment & Internships Who's Who 
 The List World Heritage List World Heritage in Danger New Inscriptions Criteria for Selection Tentative Lists World Heritage List Nominations 
 Reporting & Monitoring State of Conservation (SOC) Periodic Reporting Questionnaires 2018-2024 Questionnaires 2008-2015 Reactive Monitoring Africa Arab States Asia & Pacific Latin America and the Caribbean Europe and North America 
 Partnerships Become a Partner What Partners Do Our Partners 
 Activities All our activities Volunteer 
 Publications World Heritage Review Series Resource Manuals World Heritage wall map More publications ... 
 Funding World Heritage Fund International Assistance 
 More Contacts Site Map Become a member Donate Now! 
 UNESCO UNESCO Latest News Take Action Ideas & Data Our Impact Our expertise Core Data Portal Subscribe to our newsletters 
 Terms of use UNESCO Name & Logo UNESCO FAQ Report fraud, abuse, misconduct Scam alert 
 Policies Protection of human rights 
 (Procedure 104) Access to Information Website Privacy Notice Events Privacy Notice Data Protection and Privacy Environmental and Social Policies 
 Follow us
 Facebook Instagram Twitter Youtube Linkedin Syndication RSS 
 UNESCO 
 Culture 
 World Heritage Centre 
 The List 
 World Heritage List 
 © UNESCO World Heritage Centre 1992-2026 
 top 
 × 
 You don't have your Password or Username 
 Please enter your email . You will receive a message with the process to get your password. 
 Search 
 × 
 Login
 Please enter your username 
 Your password 
 remember my profile 
 Forgot your username or password? 
 Become a member 
 Previous  
 Next  
 Login